Mint Opinion Pieces


Manu Joseph





Mint Opinion Pieces


Remember the alpha male?

The consequences of whining

How boy (really) gets girl

The homeless amateur Indian

When you give your biometrics to Modi

Mind the spiritual gap

Women in the ‘right wing’

What happens when billionaires seek immortality

The war against Silicon Valley’s evil design

School’s out, what should our children do?

Are motivational talks useful?

What makes a novel lie

You, according to fake news

Are you a village, or a city?

Why we search for meaning in Roger Federer

Does disorder comfort Indians?

Why the poor don’t kill us

When our problems become sacred

The misanthropic diet

What I think when I think in English

Activism as a ‘Blue Whale Challenge’

Is storytelling only a cunning trick?

An exclusive extract from Manu Joseph’s ‘Miss Laila, Armed and Dangerous’

Why we should not be ashamed of our contradictions

Why happiness is the wrong goal

The ethical traveller’s guide to enjoying capitalism

Is objectivity actually a disorder?

In defence of the selfie

Sexual crimes: men, according to men

A brief review of envy

Should we hide death from children?

What do idealists want?

What intellectuals who are often wrong teach us about hope

Marriage in the time of politics

What Madras taught me about going home

The compassion of the ‘Dangal’ diet

Is there happiness in quitting love?

A beautiful moral dinosaur in the age of #MeToo

Nirav Modi and the myth of the path to success

Why intuition is greater than debate

The ‘intellectual-yet-idiot’ and other ideas

About the defamation of male bonding

How to defeat a rogue nation? Find a bigger thug

Why we should have higher standards for the good

Watching ‘Avengers: Infinity War’ with a nine-year-old

In Madras, it was always summer

How the defamation of GMOs was achieved

Heritage is what we do not have to preserve

How is good news actually transmitted?

What lovers must steal from the free speech movement

Will the umbrella never evolve?

Why the streets of Amsterdam are so joyful

‘Jugaad’, India’s most overrated idea

The art of losing to parents

Tequila ‘chaas’ and patriotic ‘chaat’

The beautiful evil of Yuval Noah Harari

The myths of Aung San Suu Kyi

Escaping India within India

One theory about loneliness

How should atheists view religion?

Why you should stop asking, ‘What’s the takeaway’?

The impossibility of discipline

The moral obligation of melancholic people

Insulting the ‘cute’ old through admiration

Is the big fat Indian wedding more vulgar than you?

Is ‘farmer suicide’ fake news, but of the good folks?

A guide to the corrupt intellectual’s year-end lists

Sabarimala and the dangers of overrating arguments

Why the upper classes are imitating the weak

The end of affection between men and women

The Gandhis and the power of the second-best choice

Why you may not know that Anna Hazare is on a fast

No men were harmed in the making of the Kondo legend

A farce called objectivity is dead, and that’s great

The rich can make great art on poverty but can’t end it

India’s devout Muslims show our assumptions are wrong

Modi should not speak in English when he goes South

The prickly question of whether voting is a moral act

The invisible hand of humanitarian activism

A theory about the sudden rise of Nitin Gadkari

What Modi’s poetry says about him and about poetry

Science and faith are not as different as we often think

How the old elite managed to co-opt Kanhaiya Kumar

Why the ‘well-educated’ suicide bomber is not a surprise

A new definition of women is strange but popular

Polarization is not the evil thing it’s made out to be

The right way to hate people and be healthy

Six messages in Narendra Modi’s return to power

Indians scorn ‘dynasties’ but are raising pampered children

Why we need not be paranoid about nationalism

How to avoid being fooled by the lure of prestige

A tribute to ‘The Office’ before the Indian version is out

How the country’s many flaws and evils create jobs

What is this ‘idea of India’ Rahul Gandhi talks about?

How mental disorders make influencers influential

Is it possible to hack the brain to make us immortal?

Democracy is going to get more democratic, and worse

Is being boorish an important Indian characteristic?

Art can teach entrepreneurs how to deal with shame

Let us grant Kashmir freedom from Indian aesthetics

The beautiful loneliness of not believing in heroes

What Savarkar could yet do for the future of Hindutva

The secrets of fitness that no government will tell you

The right way to threaten Indians into driving well

The other difficult things Modi should make us all do

Hindi cannot colonize the South because it lacks value

Greta Thunberg and Bill Gates aren’t on the same side

Why there exists no such thing as a global right wing

What Joker should learn from real-life supervillains

What an ideal fellowship of bald men could teach us

The world is not as depressing as doomsayers believe

All governments are at war with their own people

When a prison tells the modern history of a country

Are the intellectual benefits of reading overrated?

From a former poor student to present poor students

Why Godse is condemned and Savarkar hailed a hero

There is proof that Nithyananda’s Kailaasa does exist

Why you don’t love immigrants as much as you claim

Why it’s smart for the ruling party to tell another story

Use your flaws to become a better person next year

What the success of a divorce film says about marriage

Why foes of India’s ruling party may be right this time

It’s important not to let idealists put you off idealism

The most successful anti-government protests yet

India’s immense political stamina for useless issues

How the Indian street agitator suddenly got serious

The modernity of Arvind Kejriwal’s Hindu politics

Inside the mind of an Indian fan of Donald Trump

Riots happen because we tend to romanticize chaos

Why a majority’s story often fails to convince the world

What the coronavirus crisis reveals of human nature

We may finally have a chance to transform the country

An important but indecent question that has to arise

No, this novel coronavirus won’t transform the world

Our absurd notions of what’s essential and what’s not

There is a reason the rest of India cannot be Kerala

Why some things scare people more than other things

How wrong we are about actors is what makes them great

Why India should treat its poor as though they are rich

Dear Aarogya Setu, use me well and help me trust you

Why India’s melodrama over walking migrants is good

Mark Zuckerberg might be mostly right about Twitter

What we learn by looking at poverty as a pandemic

It’s clear that people miss having other people around

The appropriate way to feel low in a nation of miseries

India’s search for a role model after America’s decline

The uncomfortable question of who our worst-off are

Why it doesn’t matter that humans are basically good

Why future artists should get stuck in science streams

Bollywood is ripe for a takeover by a pragmatic rebel

Why the country’s new plan for education is smart

The clarity with which atheists should view believers

Why the melancholic are unable to find a ‘cure’ for joy

Endurance may be nature’s reward for being ordinary

Ordinary people are a lot smarter than made out to be

It was the idea of debt that created the modern world

The art of survival in a world of unknowing zombies

Why social media isn’t really the real villain of this age

There has never been a worse time to be famous in India

The kind of corruption that could do India a good turn

The enduring absurdity of following our role models

A practical reason why businesses should resist bullies

Sacha Baron Cohen is the greatest prankster of our age

A theory on what possibly saves the rich from the poor

What America’s vote tells us about the myth of influence

Austerity is a useless trick in the world we now inhabit

What the flaneur leopard says about urban migration

The ambiguous heroism of the fabled Indian farmer

How ugly public spaces could work to reassure people

The loss of a primordial human gift is stifling Indians

Some ordinary learnings from an extraordinary year

Purpose may not be as important as it’s made out to be

The future of the masses in a rapidly changing world

Two sacred theories of cricket that have long endured

How to choose a moral stand on the farmer agitation

The ruling party’s odd inability to promote a good idea

Governments will eventually defeat cryptocurrencies

The young should quit activism and go make money

Getting offended may have just got harder for Indians

A new argument enters the loud world of fitness debates

Rich Indians these days are waiting to flee India again

The tyranny of public ratings in our hyper-democracy

Why Gurgaon residents plan to move to Goa but never really do

A strange peer pressure has gripped India’s corporate executives

What exactly do we want animals to be?

The confusion we suffer over the question of mortality

India’s problem is its romance with informality

What truly keeps people happy in such unhappy times

We’re finally living in the present-and trying to escape

How vaccination lost its sacred stature

18 uncommon health tips and insights

Why your life wasn’t like that of the friends in ‘Friends’

The unrelenting nuisance of sociable people

The amateur Indian and the malaise of over-articulation

What toll will Covid take on the BJP?

Why Indians love paying lip service to philanthropy

This is a better way to ask the government to stay off cinema

Let’s celebrate what the RSS chief said about new India

Why contentment usually does not lead to happiness

Why nobody seems very outraged by the Pegasus story

Our Olympic team vests say ‘India’. It should be prefixed with ‘despite’

Indians awaiting the return to ‘normal’ are looking forward to what, really?

Making the most of our time left with ageing parents

How we’re beneficiaries of a suspension of human rights

Why is the mind so difficult for science to understand?

When a celebrity dies young, curious Indian behaviours emerge

Bringing beauty to Indian roads: A personal mission

The agonizing wait for the decline of America

James Bond and what stories think of their audiences

Why it suits so many voices in the West to flay Facebook

Delusions are infectious, and collective delusions shape history

The odd monopolies ruling our mental health discourse

Mohammad Shami, and our misguided obsession with internet trolls

Disturbing movies and why people watch them

What startup entrepreneurs could learn from writers

How the government lost farm reforms to rich farmers

Cryptos of the mind that New India no longer accepts

The war on fun and what it has cost us

Kung fu pandas and other such disciples in our midst

The tyranny of background music in our public spaces

How ‘The Matrix’ was a massive spiritual experience

What Kerala’s moneylenders understand about India

What widespread vaccine hesitancy says about people

Why are printouts checked outside airport terminals?

The folly of trying to fix inequality

How AAP could win a single state and change India

Why ‘mindfulness’ and ‘zen masters’ make little sense

What Wordle reveals about how we transmit messages

Why the ‘Himalayan yogi’ may not be fiction

Whom to trust while reading about Russia’s war

The dubious value of winning battles on social media

What may happen in a state where no one takes bribes

The other Gandhis who may need to give up leadership

What’s the ‘West’ and why does it praise others so often?

Can American billionaires really find a cure for ageing?

Why circumstances in India may get better for Muslims

Why people are better than their opinions may suggest

Why Musk appears to be in search of an oppressor

India’s complicated relationship with air-conditioning

An application for the job of Twitter’s chief executive

India is not as interesting to the world as we may think

Four major national flaws that unite Indian citizens

The extraordinary human rights of animals in India

Why Gyanvapi does not have the resonance Babri did

Why there is something wrong with the Indian buffet

Why our road minister’s statements make us so happy

The thin line between joy and misery on family holidays

There’s justice in Thackerays losing their grip over Shiv Sena

Modi is right: College degrees are overrated

The insufferable fuss over Rishi Sunak’s Indian roots

What a school reunion reveals about people and pride

How Aamir Khan nudges us to celebrate Forrest Gump

Free speech warriors need freedom-from dud petitions

How India’s middle-class came to be so patriotic

Why modern science has largely been a disappointment

No, the age of the Bollywood superstar is not over

Why Western compliments are so confusing for others

Time to admit India murders its own on the roads

The beauty of Roger Federer’s sport is a privilege of our life

We mustn’t underestimate the power of the second rung

What human nature has to do with rise of ‘far-right’

The office is outmoded, but it will still survive

Why we must adopt Ambedkar’s tactics in fighting foes

When activists look like pawns in a war against Meta

Why Rishi Sunak is an ideal ambassador of Hinduism

What will finally save us from toxic air isn’t democracy

Why T20 triumphs over intellectuals and purists

How hypermorality nearly brought Twitter to ruin

Why so many bought into the global cult of crypto

Why contentment could let people down as India grows

Does India keep people in an endless state of childhood?

The idea of ‘private spaces’ can get our free speech back

How nasty quarrels could seed good public behaviour

The difficult job of saying something good about India

Awful arguments were made against demonetization

The myths around a man in the internet hall of fame

It’s a wonder what most Indian politicians actually do

How we survive bores and others probably survive us

India’s promotion of millets is great but will likely fail

Most people aren’t anxious about artificial intelligence

Nano to Air India: What sets India’s swag apart now

Lessons for free speech from the Pawan Khera arrest

The value of those who keep losing to Narendra Modi

Why it still matters what the West thinks of Modi’s India

Why it takes high talent to produce middlebrow work

A brief history of India’s fake claims to true happiness

Dismiss biomarkers that say you are ‘fine’ and live long

We must end the life-altering power of a college-degree

Brace for the defamation of AI by those who missed out

Why the GOAT in sports is usually old or dead or both

A Republic of South India is not entirely unthinkable

Having a decent boss could have lifelong consequences

Why India seems short of sympathy for its middle class

Why a debate rages over whether ice-cream is healthy

The world and even India have left Mumbai far behind

Why nobody finds the opulent new Parliament vulgar

There’s a future for boredom in the age of immersive fun

The una-anarchist who saw evil in organized empathy

The visual poverty of India’s rich has only gotten worse

A contest of two faulty arguments familiar to Indians

Why diversity can’t be used in defence of obsolete ways

Why a digital currency for animals could find takers

The list of stuff only the super rich can buy has shrunk

‘Barbie’ highlights for men who don’t want to watch it

The character of Gurgaon is drawn from its rural roots

What happens when we’re exposed to stunning videos

Why the right to privacy holds negligible mass appeal

How to survive if you don’t feel proud of our Moon feat

The future of our children who aren’t trained to suffer

Telgi’s fate may have been different if he’d bought votes

Why psychoanalysis should be kept outside one’s home

What could possibly ruin the BJP’s dominance one day

In memory of Gandhi’s encounters with bio-hacking

Is it illegal in India to push views that China may like?

Palestinians will do better without long-distance lovers

What the Palestine conflict says about human nature

The loneliness of Israel is a punishment for its strength

The mystery of why siblings are often useless or worse

What makes people risk their lives for the sake of others?

Why wealthy sporting legends don’t mind looking silly in ads

Indians seem to love the circus of a rescue more than saving people

A censor board for OTT platforms? Think again.

The strange insignificance of the Parliament breach

Why upper-caste Hindus of Kerala became Christians

Aim for clarity: In defence of a work-life imbalance

Why disgrace is unlikely to erode the allure of Harvard

Life isn’t about adjusting to one’s external environment

What next after the temple ceremony in Ayodhya

Vexed: The future of friendships in the age of opinions

Fintech question: Why is the credit card still around?

The true meaning of ‘misanthrope’ can be found in a comedy series

Is there a meaningful issue that could anger Indians?

Semaglutide and the wild democratization of thinness

Do we really have any field of work that is lucrative?

We need to make freedom of speech low-brow in India

Indian sophistication on stray dogs can be confusing

Why the arrest of Kejriwal may have big consequences

There’s probably no such thing as soft power any longer

No, neuroscientists don’t know much about the mind

The elderly men who run the world give us hope

Palestinian puzzle: Could low-stakes compassion be dangerous?

on life: It is beautiful, and without any magic

How do noble proposals like an inheritance tax arise?

The fabled charms of heritage red-light areas are bogus

Alice Munro reported from inside the heads of women

What explains new harmful behaviours of India’s rich

Why is decision-making a lonely process?

A theory of why the BJP did poorly in the elections

The quiet influencers: How the poor have shaped India

Why the super-rich and we pay the same for house help

The spectacle of the West is as interesting as it ever was

Why human health is more than a behaviour problem

India’s Olympic Games shame is not about sports at all

Kamala Harris inspires us but don’t ask us to explain

‘Baby Reindeer’ banks on the new compassion for frail men

Why there’s a clash over classifying an athlete as female

India’s Supreme Court is right: Exclude the creamy layer

Lessons from Donald Trump’s ‘Hillbilly’ running mate

Nari Hira was a success only Bombay could have given India

Why Indian cities may be doomed to remain unliveable

How unhealthy behaviour could deliver success

Nobody told us that Kashmiris are also ‘polarized’

How could a startup religion succeed in ancient times?

The world is in the grip of some fierce delusions

Why Indians who didn’t know Ratan Tata liked him

The spectacle of SpaceX’s rocket catch is how science has failed

Why Kangana Ranaut could be seen as India’s Trump

Gifting isn’t really the noble act it seems to be

Why ‘liberals’ are often bad ambassadors of good ideas

Why national pride has not cleaned up Delhi’s air

Why the 5-star hotel experience needs urgent reforms

A right that women don’t have is the right to mediocrity

Trump’s victory has exposed the worst argument of the West

Gabriel García Márquez in the time of Netflix

Escaping India within India is an exorbitant exercise

Why we’re lucky to be Indians in such a terrible world

Longevity is usually a reward for being unspectacular

India has become too rich to let petty clerks torment people

What protects us from being stabbed in our own homes?

Migrating to the US has long been a rite of humiliation

Why nobody talks about India’s ‘brain drain’ anymore

Trump’s Gaza plan may be more pragmatic than it looks

Our politics is usually shaped by the people we dislike

America and the bearable loneliness of losing the West

How entertainment got boring in the age of streaming

Narayana Murthy, Subrahmanyan and Jamie Dimon miss something simple about work

We had more shame in the 1980s: Recall Bofors?

How language may have conspired to keep people unfit

Where our freedom of speech came from and where it went

How to reform your son after you watched a TV show

India has a tariff on America’s huge cultural surplus

There’s crushing news for people who want to live long

Who’d have thought Google could be replaced

Why movies that win Oscars are no longer enjoyable

Just how ‘innocent’ are civilians during times of war?



Title Page

Table of Contents





Remember the alpha male?


2017-02-17

O. Panneerselvam has a good bowing technique. When J. Jayalalithaa, the late Tamil Nadu chief minister, would speak to him, he would bend his knees, fold his upper body at his hips, hold his chest with one hand and cover his mouth with the other. This way he could stand in subordination as long as his boss needed to finish her conspiratorial whisper, his ears very close to her mouth so that she did not have to raise her voice and be audible to his rivals. No matter how close his face was to hers, his manner was always slavish enough to reassure her. And, no one could read his lips. When he bowed to her official vehicle, he had a slightly different deep bend. Some days he fell at her feet on all fours, some days he lay flat on the ground; it is not clear what made him choose one way of falling over the other.

Like him, most legislators in Tamil Nadu, the men especially, possess the gift of shamelessness, an unsung talent. They may seem unusual to many Indians but they are symbolic of a way of the world, which is today filled with Panneerselvams. Their flexibility is not always obvious, and they may appear far more dignified in plain sight than him, but they are, in private, as reverential and loyal as he was to Jayalalithaa. It is the very reason why they succeed. They are rewarded precisely for not possessing exceptional qualities. Edappadi K. Palanisamy, the man whom Sasikala V.K. picked as chief minister after she learnt she was going to prison, is of the same type. Dependent, hence loyal. In the heart of Tamil Nadu politics today is the battle of two newly liberated loyalists. Is the world outside very different?

The White House may disagree but the fact is that in many walks of modern life, the dominant and manly alpha, who once had evolutionary advantages, has no chance of competing. It appears that in the changing world, domineering qualities are inessential, even repulsive. But the crucial reason why the alpha has receded is in the innate flaw he always contained.

The powerful are wary of worthy challengers, hence they promote the obeisant and the meek over the special and the dudes. As a result, in many professions, the alpha type is killed very early, in the preliminary stages. The innately manly realize it and transform into something more agreeable. Most alphas learn when they are only boys that their careers depend on ensuring that old people do not feel threatened by them.

Also, beta men, like alcoholics, attract more friends than the strong do because men find the frailties of other men comforting and endearing. And what the strong and solitary realize very late is that success is so often a reward given by friends. Also, the practised flexibility of the betas, who can bend, crawl and slither, and absorb the daily humiliations of being subordinate, makes them great survivors in the treacherous world outside their homes. In homes, too, the alpha has vanished. Men who could do anything they wanted and remained unchallenged at home, who could belong to the night, who took mistresses, who never knew the exact ages of their children and who never entered the kitchen.

As to what ended the golden age of such men, people would point to the rise of women. But there is another, underrated reason—sons who observed their fathers carefully and chose not to be like them. The world is transformed not only by revolutions, but also by children who do not wish to be like their parents. Sons who eventually become decent men, family men, men who know the names of maids, men who transfer food from large bowls into small bowls and put them in the fridge.

It was inevitable, though, that the increasing domestication of men would create a caricature, the farcical modern men who say what is noble and admissible, who lurk around holding labels like “sexist” that they can stick on other men, who claim to be feminists without the experience of being women, who claim to be more aroused by Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak than Sunny Leone, who flog their emotions as proof of their modernity, and talk about how they cry as though it is an achievement, and how all men should cry; men who take political correctness to such absurd extremes that the journalist Tina Brown, as she recently said, is often relieved to meet some honest rogue males.

The association of betas would promote other likeable betas, further shrinking the prospects for the alpha type in almost all subjective fields of human activity, including academics, literature and politics. The stray political strongmen who have risen in several parts of the world are fascinating exceptions; they are beneficiaries of a string of extraordinary accidents and aberrant conditions. Their victories, as in the case of Donald Trump, are not evidence of alpha prospects but only show how ridiculous such men look in the modern world. A problem with the alpha, who is preoccupied with the stiffness of his backbone, is, to borrow from the late Margaret Thatcher, that his spine does not seem to reach his brain.

It is not that the alphas are going extinct; just that in a softer, more collaborative modern society there is no place for a man to begin his career as a fiery formidable ape. It is something he can become later when the time is right. He must bow until he need not. Like Panneerselvam, who asserted himself only when there were no more feet in Chennai that he would have to kiss.

There are many strongmen in Indian public life who started out as pliable humble men with no air in their chests. In politics, such agreeable men can be seen often as deputies bent reverentially in front of their chiefs—whispering. A fascinating character of Indian politics is the frequency of stage whispers. Why do the chief and his sidekick often whisper to each other on the stage as though the matter cannot wait until the function is over? It is not a lazy coincidence. This is how the deputy ensures that he is seen by the public, and seen as having the ear of the chief. Narendra Modi, now prime minister, and Arvind Kejriwal, now chief minister, too have been there, as humble deputies listening or whispering to old men in full public view. Then a time comes when the deputies suddenly become dominant, formidable men and eclipse their chiefs. And they cautiously appoint agreeable betas, who do not threaten them, at least for the moment.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit Happiness of Other People.





The consequences of whining


2017-03-17

First of all, it is not called whining. There are several respectable terms for it. It is also, imprecisely but usually with good intentions, called outrage. When it is conducted on behalf of inferior people, who are of course not overtly recognized as inferior, it is “compassion”. Yet at its core it is whining. Sometimes a defamed word is the most precise.

The benefits of whining are many. As it is an expression of powerlessness, it attracts victims and everyone then begins to repeat the grouses, thereby corroborating and establishing the problem as real. The social whining of a group helps others who do not know they have a problem to discover or invent one, thus deepening their sense of belonging. The public repetition of grouses also confuses the strong who would otherwise be very certain that they are innately, racially or sexually, better than the others. But somewhere along the way whining itself has become a social disease. Highly infectious, especially among the youth, its true lethality is in fooling the hosts into believing that they are conscientious while they are only whiners.

In an age where everything is amplified because of technology, there are ever finer slivers of grievances to carp about. Among the intellectual middle class that believes in transforming society through compassion rather than brute economic force, there is the ceaseless griping about the wealth of those richer than them; pollution; the destruction of secularism, as though it ever existed; the rise of the shrewd nationalists; the shrinking of freedoms; the many problems of women, of Dalits, of farmers, of migrants.

Lament is beyond the norm in the arts; it has in fact become proof of moral compass and seriousness. Among the beloved things social lament has stolen and ruined is modern literature. We have lost it to activism. Historically, you can say, at the heart of all literature, was the whine of the underdog. It is after all a powerful literary device. Literature is often a tribute to the weak. But when whining becomes an infestation, it changes the very character of literature. In India, for instance, the establishment and the huddles of literary referees have set up reward systems that encourage the righteous “social message”, which is rated higher than style, playfulness and storytelling.

Commercial novels are luckier because they are regulated by market forces, but substantial novels are at the mercy of the system of whiners. Activism in literature has naturally become the refuge for bores, who need to only have wounds and issues to claim to be novelists. The fellowship of lamenters then promotes its own and the cabal grows. The readers, meanwhile, stop reading most of such books because they find them dull. Writers then sit in panel discussions and call such readers stupid, and they whine more about how “nobody is reading”, how “the world is getting dumb”.

The white savants of fine whining in advanced economies are among the great corrupters of literature in many parts of the world. They have expectations of special whines from every poor and quaint region of the world and they set up powerful reward systems. Developing world writers then consciously or unconsciously set out to achieve those rewards, which are also known as recognition.

This is more evident in the type of Indian cinema or films about India that are celebrated in the West. India’s Oscar entries in recent times too have often been an attempt to pander to the system that equates lament with art. There have, of course, been some beloved films like Peepli Live, and aberrations likeBarfi!,but the Indian Oscar entry is mostly a reward for lament, not storytelling.

The gigantic whining of the liberals that co-opts and encourages the grouses of the socially backward, is even more destructive outside the arts.

Every time a Dalit humanities student kills himself or appears to have killed himself, the liberals hold their ideological foes responsible. In the absence of a suicide note or if the note is ambiguous, the Facebook posts of the deceased are then used to construct a story of tragic discrimination. Thousands of Dalit students are constantly fed the notion that it is reasonable for them to kill themselves. They would be better served if they were instead told that there is no glory in suicide, and that when human beings kill themselves, the real reason is usually a dangerous and poorly understood psychological state.

But the intellectuals never mention the hard truths about the society they have created. Instead, they encourage the Dalits to live and feel like social victims, egg them on to live out their youth lamenting their plight. For the clinically depressed among them, passing through the ceaseless negativity of the activist lament that permeates the humanities would be nothing short of a minefield of suicidal triggers.

The other kind of suicide that liberal whining has promoted with the help of unquestioning developmental journalism is the myth of farmer suicide, where an agricultural worker who kills himself is portrayed as a “farmer” who has taken his life for purely financial reasons, a contentious hypothesis that suits the political interests of those who fan it. Encouraged by the intellectual endorsement of such suicides, a group of farmers arrived in Delhi a few days ago bearing the skulls of farmers who had killed themselves in the past. They wanted financial help. At least they wished to live, though of course they implied that they would kill themselves if they did not receive it. But most of them would not take their own lives. That is how it goes. But some who are psychologically prone might. They would then be added to the statistical charts of “farmer suicides”.

The other victims of the urban Indian lament network are Kashmir’s youth, who have been reassured that they are right to thwart all attempts by India at economic progress because a sovereign Islamic Republic of Kashmir, however improbable and unstable, is more important.

What is the opposite of the Indian right wing has a reasonable answer today: whining. It appears nothing else is afoot, and a whole generation of youth is in the wasting sway of whining, mistaking it for grander things.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit Happiness Of Other People.





How boy (really) gets girl


2017-03-23

The hero of Badrinath Ki Dulhania is a young man who does not know what compound interest is. In fact, he does not know what simple interest is. Even though his father owns a car dealership, where he works, he is unaware that ABS stands for anti-lock braking system. All of the world’s acronyms or abbreviations are unfamiliar to him. Apart from the Taj Mahal, he does not know the other wonders of the world as decided by white people. He looks like the sort of muscular man who can make his breasts quiver at will, and rate that highly as talent. He has an idiot man-friend whom he loves and they often walk with their little fingers locked. He is unemployable, short-tempered, and lives in Jhansi, which he does not wish to flee. He is an obedient son because his father is rich, a condition that is often passed off as an Indian family value. Yet, in the end, the boy secures the love of an exceptional girl.

She is beautiful and dominant. At weddings she dances in the Hum Aapke Hain Koun way that leads men to sing to her buttocks, but what she really wants is to start her own business. She lives in Kota in the type of beautiful house producer Karan Johar wishes, for aesthetic reasons, every lower middle-class Indian would possess. Her home is a happy place but she wishes to flee to make something of her life. She can speak English fluently and is familiar with words like “claustrophobia”. She recognizes her suitor from Jhansi as an imbecile. In the end, he does not transform into a clever man, there is no situation that he overcomes through force of character, he does nothing heroic, but she falls in love with him.

There are Indian stories where a man wins the affection of a woman because he is extraordinary. And there are stories where a man is so fortunate when he is unremarkable, or, worse, a wreck. In most of mainstream Indian cinema, the boy is stricken by the beauty of the girl and some other qualities, including talent and intellect, but it is usually not clear what the girl sees in the hero. That Devdas was written by a Bengali does not explain the attraction of a total loser and why women must love him. Badrinath…, in fact, is puzzling in its deliberate portrayal of the boy as not merely unremarkable but exceedingly stupid, with no redeeming prospects. It is a type of carelessness that Hollywood usually avoids—the boy in La La Land, for instance, is a jazz romantic and some sort of struggling puritan pianist, highly admirable features in a man who also resembles Ryan Gosling.

We dismiss the emptiness of the Indian hero as part of the artistic mediocrity of commercial cinema. But what if it is not a flaw at all? What if the unremarkable man as the most common recipient of love is closer to the truth? What if the typical modern Indian hero is, in fact, sheer anthropology?

The love of a girl, with its exaggerated compliments, long, fond stares and promise of decadence, is generally presumed to be a reward for distinguishing male qualities. It is an idea that women themselves have promoted through the many ways in which they talk of romance and the loud expectations they have from men, which physically and intellectually disqualify most men. That is the reason I went through my entire late adolescence confused by the lovers the adorable girls took. As it is, I could not understand how women could be in love with men who were not writers, or at least scientists and other kinds of artists (but not the postmodern kind). And how could all of them laugh so easily in the company of their men when most men were not funny at all?

In the real world, love occurs for the simplest reason, that it is very desperate to happen, and because it cannot wait it tends to reward not the extraordinary but the available. As Eartha Kitt sang: Doesn’t have to be prince or movie star/A Texas oilman or a French marquis/Doesn’t have to be handsome as a picture/An ordinary guy’s all right with me.

An exceptional quality of the ordinary is that it is ubiquitous. Like in a Hindi film, a guy in the right place at the right time has a better chance than the invisible prophesied genius titan. The regular guy is in the right place at the right time because he is up and about most times even as his formidable competition is hidden in solitary confinement working long hours on heroic dreams. He is most often not the brilliant coder or artist or scientist or athlete and does not have to spend a colossal amount of time nurturing his gifts. And he probably exhibits signs of appealing goodness because as an ordinary person he, rightly, believes he needs the backing of people, so he has a natural tendency to reach out.

The exceptional young men, meanwhile, however attractive their talents might be, may not be as agreeable as the ordinary. Or they might be too proud to make the first move, or too scared of the shame of rejection.

In the language of love, there is much talk about the inexplicable “connection” that two people discover, or the fiery “chemistry”. This is meant to explain why women choose regular guys when they could have been with more gifted men. But we can never be sure how much of this chemistry is influenced by the far less glorious circumstances of the players involved or how much of this is in reality plain misconceptions or delusions that people wish to surrender to because they are tired of loneliness. And there is the matter of equal handicaps.

In the satire The Lobster, director Yorgos Lanthimos creates a fictitious world that is somewhat familiar: An oppressive society expects everyone to find love within a certain period, or they will be converted into animals of their choice. “If you encounter any problems you cannot resolve yourselves,” an official tells prospective couples, “you will be assigned children, that usually helps.”

In their desperate search for love to save themselves from becoming animals, men and women who are handicapped in some form also search for similar flaws in others. In the real world that the film parodies, love is very rarely a match of the strong and often a union of equal weaknesses. And there is much beauty in that.

It does not matter what creates it, there is such a thing as love. It is our finest form of insanity, and we must not be too troubled by whether its origins are sound at all.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit Happiness Of Other People.





The homeless amateur Indian


2017-03-31

To ruin the chances of sleeping with them, rasp, “Is the science of climate change beyond dispute?” They say things like “asparagus” and “edamame” and eat them, too; even the men do. They like Aung San Suu Kyi, and everybody she may get along with. They read very long articles in English that are called longform. They despise large dams, and the word “infrastructure” when uttered by a provincial man. But some things that they hate they would consider loving if they came with the word “sustainable”. They know what an “open” relationship means. Many of them, especially in Mumbai, have “friends” among street urchins. They wish for diversity in plants and animals even though they themselves are a monoculture of identical ethical organisms spread across the informed world whose president was Barack Obama. They think “Priyanka should get in now” is a form of political analysis. At times they hold candles and go somewhere. They probably read Lounge.

They were, for long, awkward in India, but they had their islands where they could escape the nation. Now there is nowhere to hide, not even in literature festivals. This is a government that is everywhere. So they feel uncertain in universities, think tanks, cultural bodies, journalism, theatre, art and mainstream cinema, activism and in charitable works. They have lost beef too. In the past few days they have come to fear that their biometrics will be known to the government, and that they can be raided by taxmen on any pretext, though that was always the case. In the middle of all this, an unambiguous man of religion has become the chief minister of India’s most populous state. And, if you pay attention, he seems to be saying all the right things as though everything that they had attributed to him in the past was a lie. The worst truth of this new order is that they, who received the finest education and other opportunities, and who consider themselves the most intelligent and informed among Indians, have been shown as inaccurate, unreliable and incompetent political analysts of their own nation. It appears that there is only one way left to use them as political forecasters. Listen carefully to what they have to say, for the outcome will be the very opposite.

They were always amateur Indians. The times when they strayed outside their safe houses, they did not know how to negotiate the nation. What should they do when a government official asks for a bribe, what should they do when their car hits the bumper of another vehicle, how should they speak to a cop, what are the meanings of many words in their own mother tongues? But never before have state and society encroached into their islands so forcefully and decisively.

They are not alone anywhere any more. Nowhere in the malls, theatres and restaurants can they be guaranteed a degree of refinement. Must they now stand for the national anthem? And what should they do if a man is on the phone throughout the movie? They have heard stories of friends being punched just for objecting to such things. Never have the other kind of Indians been so empowered, and so affluent. There is no place he cannot afford to enter. In any case, some of the richest residential real estate in the country have for long been taken over by fanatic vegetarians. Now there are affluent residential colonies in all major cities where residents demand the construction of temples. What should the nice people do? Where should the amateur Indian go?

They do consider themselves “global”, and everyone knows “global” does not include Sudan or Mongolia; they will be able to obtain visas for the most advanced economies. But despite everything, all things considered, it is in India that life is the easiest, it is here that they are assured of good spots on the social mountain.

What must they do? How can they become as confident as the son-of-the-soil Indian, who has friends in the police commissioner’s office and in other government places, who knows when to stand firm during a traffic dispute and when to flee, and how to game the system. How to be Indian in India?

It is hard for them to change. It will be even harder for their children to negotiate the new India because they are raised to be global. They must flee but then the world elsewhere, everywhere, is changing too. Are they then doomed to belong nowhere?

Why must one belong? Isn’t that what the problem is—everywhere, the idea of home has become the most dangerous and potent force. All disenchantments and jealousies and biases can be couched as concern for the welfare of home. But very few people, even among the intellectuals who have tasted liberal thought, can escape the need to belong to a place. There is a village in every person. Also, most wanderers realize, sooner or later, that they need a home because others have their own. In a transformed world, where democracy is not a righteous device any more but a very good conductor of human flaws, the migrants would increasingly come under various political and social pressures.

Should the refined amateur Indians accept defeat? It is a good way to survive India. There is much peace in defeat, in giving up, in becoming a hermit in a high-strung world. It is an under-appreciated form of peace. But most of them do not find peace in defeat; they have instead become more political than they realize. And the path they have chosen is the politics of the displaced.

They have become the refugee who has been evicted from home. Such a refugee tends to exaggerate the charms of home, he sees things in his home, about home, that he would not have seen if he were not displaced. He then becomes a valiant moral underdog whose purpose is to fight the evil giant.

The refugee talks or writes copiously about his condition and his powerful wicked foes; he gathers forces with similar victims and the conflict then becomes the axis of life. The resolution then becomes the useful myth, like the notion that a story has an end. And the amateur Indian slowly ceases to be an amateur.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit Happiness Of Other People.





When you give your biometrics to Modi


2017-04-07

It is remarkable that Aadhaar and Al-Qaeda mean the same thing, which is “foundation”. It’s even more remarkable that the sane and neurotic foes of India’s plan to give every citizen a unique identity, or an “Aadhaar number”, who have tried to defame the programme in every way possible, have missed this tweetable fact.

There is some discomfort in the upper classes about Aadhaar. Even though the government does not wish to transfer money into their bank accounts or give them free quinoa and cashew nuts every month, it wants them to let it scan their eyes and take their fingerprints. In return they will get nothing; just a unique number that will reaffirm their existence and financial actions in government records.

When the Unique Identification programme was launched in 2009 during the Congress regime, everyone thought it was only for the poor. They would give away their biometrics to the government and in return receive a credible identity. They would find it much easier to open bank accounts, and the government would find it easier to distribute cash and grain to the rightful beneficiaries. But now the Narendra Modi government has made it mandatory for taxpayers to surrender to Aadhaar. In effect, all Indians, except Naga sadhus, will need Aadhaar.

People who fear Modi find this ominous. They say that the technology of Aadhaar makes it easy for a strongman like him to spy on his rivals and citizens. “The end of privacy,” they write in articles that have Modi appearing to peer into your private lives.

Nandan Nilekani, the tech billionaire who launched the Unique ID programme and headed it until 2014, and who continues to champion it, told me in a phone conversation that the opponents of Aadhaar can be “divided into four gangs—‘the privacy’ gang; ‘the-rights-of-the-poor’ gang; ‘the oh-my-god-1984-has-arrived’ gang and ‘the Luddites’, who are scared of technology.”

By virtue of being citizens, people surrender a lot of personal information to the government. Absolute privacy is a right that they give up when they choose not to live in the forests. What Aadhaar does is make it easy for the government to have a person’s surrendered life all in one place.

Recently, there was a spate of claims that the Aadhaar database was leaking information. That was not true though. A banking official had released the information, which was a criminal act. The fact remains that data can be stolen.

Closely tied to the privacy gang is the “Oh-my-god-1984-has-arrived” gang, which includes people who have actually read 1984 by George Orwell. Those who take Orwell very seriously recently found affirmation in whistleblower Edward Snowden and his revelation of a world where spying is a natural act of the state.

But then India does not need the Aadhaar system to be a surveillance state. It now has more efficient ways of spying through communication networks. I cannot substantiate this but I believe that the government illegally spies on inconvenient people all the time. Even the police, apart from visiting soothsayers, illegally eavesdrops on suspects to solve cases. Any device that is connected to the Internet is vulnerable.

Apart from this, the defence of Aadhaar has these common ingredients: No system is perfect but organizations that are accountable to the people and have a monopoly over their data have a powerful self-interest in guarding the information; in the modern world everybody is giving away their information, including their biometrics, to American tech companies and foreign governments anyway, so why must there be special suspicions over Aadhaar; it is true that American tech companies and foreign governments cannot coerce you to give away your data to them, but the Indian government is forcing taxpayers to enter the Aadhaar system to make tax evasion difficult. “There are 250 million PANs (permanent account numbers),” Nilekani says, but only about 40 million who file returns.

Encoiled within the privacy issue are reasonable and overblown fears. A strand of the hysteria does emerge from the self-absorbed, self-important quality of our times where people are in a quest for victimhood because there is no other tribute to themselves that is available to them.

The arguments for and against Aadhaar are subordinate to some overarching questions: Does Aadhaar improve the lives of those people who need the government for almost every aspect of their lives? And if it does, are the intellectuals, once again in their lifetime, sabotaging what is good for the poor because they do not like some elements of the reform? And is such sabotage, once again, couched as very serious social concern?

Of the four gangs, Nilekani has some regard only for “the-rights-of-the-poor” gang, which is led by activists like Aruna Roy, Jean Drèze and Nikhil Dey, who were the forces behind the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act. Their concern is that the requirement for Aadhaar would create a situation where some people would be denied their rights to welfare because they did not possess the Aadhaar number, or because of a malfunction of technology. Reacting to such concerns, the Supreme Court has stated that Aadhaar should not be made mandatory to receive benefits. Meanwhile, over the years, the processes of the Aadhaar system have been improving.

It is hard to ignore the possibility that some social activists would have seen Aadhaar as a direct threat to their turfs. One way in which rural activists tried to rebuke Nilekani was by reminding him how little time he had spent in the villages of India. “Even among them they would fight over who has spent more time in the villages. Spending time in the villages was some great marker for them,” he says.

It is the way of the world that activists in the social sector dislike the philanthropy of billionaires, especially when they appear to accomplish things in years that activism has not for decades. The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, for instance, is a victim of frequent activist condemnation.

It is amusing that Aadhaar has remained optional for the poor, and has become mandatory for people whose survival does not depend on the government, including me. I do not have an Aadhaar number because I do not wish to give the government more information than I need to. But, if the middle class claims that its hatred for Aadhaar is chiefly out of concern for the poor (please turn off the canned laughter, I can’t focus), it is useful for them to consider every Aadhaar enrolment as a vote of confidence. Over 1.1 billion Indians have enrolled. Only the power of word of mouth can create this level of acceptance. One can argue that the poor are not very smart, that they have been fooled by marketing. Or, maybe, the poor know things about themselves that others do not.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit Happiness Of Other People.





Mind the spiritual gap


2017-04-21

Finally, after a long silence, he said, “I will tell you something.” One of two things would happen after that, he said. I would not understand it, or I would. If I did, I would be terrified. When that happened, he said, “Don’t panic.”

We were alone in his home. It was an isolated house at the end of a quiet lane. I was 17, he was probably a year older. I looked nervously behind me. I made a mental map of my run out of the house. I did not know though what I would be fleeing. Then he said what he wished to say.

Everything we saw and perceived with our senses was a lie, he said, reality was not what it appeared to be. There was something else going on. I had never heard this before (it was eight years before The Matrix). But he did not have to say a word more. In that instant I understood, and I was transformed. I was not terrified though, which worried me, but I knew I had not misunderstood him. My reality those days was not enjoyable and I was ecstatic to discover it was all a hoax, and that there was something else beneath the visible world. Life suddenly had meaning. And there seemed to be a reason why in the universe there was something instead of nothing. And there was, all of a sudden, the promise of the paranormal and it did not require God at all.

We spent days talking about the unity of all things and the possibility of seeing in our minds things that the eyes wouldn’t show, and about the cryptic clues to enlightenment contained in all the religions, Hinduism especially. And, why in the history of humans some people went off the grid for about a month and then returned as gods. I actually paced the floor to crack the meaning of life. We were not on drugs.

My friend then began talking about contracting leprosy because it would be easy for a leper to have no ego. He also said he understood the idea of hell as an infinitesimal point of immense heat in the mind. He began to isolate himself from the world and eventually refused to meet anyone. I was convinced he had figured a way to achieve moksha.

Many years later, I came to understand that he was schizophrenic. Why should that diminish his spiritual standing in my memory? But then what if the very things that I had once considered deeply philosophical in him were also the symptoms of mental illness? Does “I believe in a force” emerge from an ancient insanity?

Spirituality, today, has come to mean a sophisticated godless path to “explore the mind” even though nobody really explores the mind unless they have ingested substance or have lost control of their minds in a more organic way. The act of thinking is certainly a form of exploration but in very few. The subscribers of secular spirituality are among the smartest and most successful people on earth. Most of them had happy or normal childhoods, so they are not trained to be solitary for long hours. So they gather and do things in unison. Their guru says, “You are me and I am you,” which means nothing, as he himself knows, because his unusual costume alone is meant to convey that he is certainly not one of them. But they revere him. There is an emptiness in them caused by the rot of good life, economic stagnation and the unnatural requirements of morality created by high social stakes, but they wish to describe the emptiness in a more philosophical way.

In some people, the quest for meaning, the proclaimed ability to see the oneness of all things, the belief that they are cosmic, and their detours into trances have been documented as madness. Very often the insane are glorious, hence influential. Most of modern spirituality is the phenomenon of millions of sane people imitating the insane.

This form of imitation can lead to happiness just as religion appears to make most people happy. But the type of happiness that does not emerge from clarity will always be unsteady.

People are susceptible to exotic ideas because what they are fleeing from is boredom. They would be very annoyed if you asked them whether there is really such a thing as meditation. They would be annoyed because they apparently do it somehow without becoming anthills. If you ask them what exactly meditation is, it would appear that they are not very sure. “Clear your mind of all thoughts,” says someone, but then if the mind is empty, it is not the mind in the first place. “Absence of thought,” says someone. But is that even possible in a conscious person? “Meditation is trance,” says someone, but the fact is that neither the sane nor the insane can instruct their mind to go into a trance at will, from 8am to 8.30am. “Meditation is focus on a single thought,” says someone. What is “a single thought”? Such singularity does not exist. A thought is at once a composite of many thoughts. Also, how is a meditational focus different from reading a book or playing chess? Some claim any focus is meditation, some say that is not true. “Just observe your breath,” says someone. That, I accept, is the best definition of meditation. It is a very healthy but mild aerobic exercise. But nobody wants to call it that.

The philosopher Jiddu Krishnamurti’s definition of meditation dismisses all the popular notions of his own fans. “Meditation is not a search, it’s not a seeking, a probing, an exploration. It is an explosion and discovery. It’s not the taming of the brain to conform nor is it a self-introspective analysis, it is certainly not the training in concentration…. It’s something that comes naturally, when all positive and negative assertions and accomplishments have been understood and drop away easily. It is the total emptiness of the brain.”

Such a state of mind that comes “naturally” is also known as madness. In Pupul Jayakar’s biography of the man, she reverently profiles a part of his life that would be unfamiliar to those who have only read his clear precise words. She reveals that at times he imagined great violence inside his body. After one such fit he passed out. When he woke up he asked her, referring to his own face, “Did you see that face? The Buddha was here, you are blessed.”

Millions read Krishnamurti to understand life. It is more useful to read him to understand his life. Over the years I have enjoyed entering the beautiful mind of this abnormal person. When I was younger, I used to be fooled by his questions. Like, “What is the mind?” I would be thrilled that such a titanic question was about to be answered in such a slim book. But he would never really answer the question. He would be cryptic. “What is truth?”, “what is thought?” He only asked deep questions, never answered them. He did state many wise things but they were answers to midget questions—about fear and religion and love.

The notion that the ideal way to live is in esoteric and abstract things occurring to us can, in reality, be detrimental to a person’s long-term well-being. How long can a person be happy in the search for meaning when such a quest is on the spectrum of neurosis? What if Truth is what it appears to be—life is an accident that has no meaning, and we must manufacture meanings so that we don’t kill ourselves out of boredom?

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit Happiness Of Other People.





Women in the ‘right wing’


2017-04-28

The two women get along. They are patriots, they believe Hinduism is also a place, they deny they are right wing because ancient European labels do not make any sense in India, and they adore Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who follows one of them on Twitter.

Amrita Bhinder was until recently a tax lawyer with a corporation in Gurugram but she quit the lucrative job, she says, for health reasons. She has been a diabetic since early adolescence. But she has the swag of a healthy Punjabi athlete. “A fun thug,” she describes herself soon after she walks into the restaurant where servers in short black dresses are buzzing about this Sunday afternoon. She has snuck in her own wine in a plastic bottle. Bhinder tweets often and late into the night. She is a perpetual stream of news that shows a world ruined by liberals. Last year, journalist Barkha Dutt threatened on Twitter to sue her for sharing a link that claimed Dutt had helped terrorists in Kashmir. Bhinder, of course, made the most of it. Her response to Dutt’s threat received nearly 5,000 retweets.

The other woman at the table is a fiction writer and co-creator of one of the most popular Hindi films in the last five years. She did not wish to be named because, she said, she wanted to be “below the radar”, but the fact is that she did not trust me to show her in a good light. She is one of the many lady admirers of the male monastery called the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS). She is so awestruck by its most famous bachelor, Modi, that she does not take his name. She only refers to him as “Prime Minister”. “Say ‘Modi,” I tell her. “The Prime Minister,” she says.

There is a perception that the left is a natural place for any Indian woman, especially the urbane. The left, after all, is a late invention to tame human nature. It celebrates vulnerabilities, laments atrocities and flogs wounds. The right is chiefly preoccupied with the preservation of home and race, hence it rates order above freedom, which is a form of disorder.

Even though they do not realize it, most people are drawn helplessly to either the left or the right. Among the women I have spoken to, who are drawn to the right and are sane, there is a strong sense of home and community, but they also have respect for liberal values because they are beneficiaries of those innovations that have diminished the power of men. Also, in a generalization, they have not been colonized by the power and beauty of Western arts. Most of them did begin their adult lives with no strong political views but then two major factors appear to have tipped them. A crush on Modi, and bitter personal experiences with some liberals.

The screenwriter, in fact, was deeply affected by both. She was, initially, only curious about Modi. When an opportunity arose to see him at an air-conditioned hotel banquet, she ensured she went. In that function, which I too had attended, Modi said: If you are going to negotiate a land deal with villagers, don’t wear “suit and tie”; once, when he went to meet Manmohan Singh, “nobody spoke…then only I was talking”; on the border between India and Pakistan, the nature of the desert soil ensures that the fence keeps falling, so India must build a border made of solar panels. As she heard him speak, she thought he was not so bad at all.

A few days later, she was at a party at the home of Congress member of Parliament Shashi Tharoor. She got chatting with an acquaintance, a humanities professor. When the screenwriter said she was impressed with Modi, the professor “began screaming at me, screaming. She tried to educate me. She was just screaming. It was humiliating”.

At the time, this was the screenwriter’s social set. She came to know of many women like her who found it hard to accept the fundamentalism of the leading liberals but chose to keep quiet, “because if you speak your heart, especially if you happen to like the Prime Minister, then suddenly you don’t have friends”.

For some, the drift towards the right began not because of a stray liberal but out of disgust for the Congress party. “My hatred started with Indira Gandhi,” says Bhinder, who comes from an army background. “She and her party always undermined the army. Always tried to humiliate it. So more than right wing, I am a Congress-hater and a Modi-lover.” She also despises the Congress for its appeasement of Muslims. She has read all the major versions of the Quran and believes that the holy book should be made mandatory reading for “all the citizens of the world” for reasons that Muslims would not be delighted to hear. But, she accepts, most Muslims take humanity more seriously than scripture.

At the moment, Bhinder is distracted by her phone. She chuckles, and shows it to me. “Your Apple ID is being used to sign into a device near New Delhi,” the message says. Such elementary hacking attempts occur five or six times a day, she says. She has lost control over her phone a few times. Sometimes she gets a call from a man who claims he is a policeman and is on his way to arrest her. Who is doing this? She says that Pakistani’s spy force, ISI, has set up a network in India to intimidate people like her, “even though I am a nobody”.

Shilpi Tewari, the architect and social media figure who was in the news last year after she was suspected of doctoring videos that showed Jawaharlal Nehru University students uttering seditious things, “knew nothing about politics” until the anti-corruption movement began. She liked Arvind Kejriwal, now Delhi chief minister, until he entered politics. “I now think he is worse than Sonia and Rahul Gandhi and anyone else in politics.”

This is a common reaction among Modi’s admirers. Some place in their subconscious sees Kejriwal as the real political threat to Modi. She, of course, is a fan of Modi. She was one long before this February, when she saw an image in which he was wearing a blue stole and tweeted that she wanted it. In a few hours, he had it delivered to her house. She is not among those women who would be terrified that Modi knows where she lives.

She says that the defining quality of women who support the Bharatiya Janata Party is that they are “practical and rooted in the system”. They are never surprised by India because their values belong here.

Elsewhere, there is a section of liberal women, most of them married, with children, who are changing. They tell me they have developed a contempt for the sexual revolutions of their single friends because they consider them phoney. They are amused and annoyed by those women who maintain public postures of strength, while pleading with men for love and marriage in private. One of them, who watches with no confusion as women in her neighbourhood stand in their balconies and throw rose petals over platoons of marching RSS men, has told me on several occasions that there are very modern and sophisticated women, including her, who are developing very conservative views about how young women should be, views that would bring a smile to the face of Sushma Swaraj.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit Happiness Of Other People.

The writer tweets at @manujosephsan





What happens when billionaires seek immortality


2017-05-05

Death is an old technology but, like the umbrella, it has endured. Will the concept of death, an ingenious idea of nature, ever be replaced by a more advanced science invented by a species?

Many have suspected that such a moment may miraculously arrive in their own lifetime. Among them are a group of people who have the best reasons to go on living—billionaires. They have funded companies, started trusts and announced awards to solve the problem of death. The efforts would, in our age, lead to unnatural longevity at the very least. And if mankind achieves an escape velocity of longevity, where lifespans are so long, say 200 years, advancing and maturing technologies would stretch them even further. Then, one scientist says, people might live for 1,000 years. Aubrey de Grey, the British gerontologist, says 1,000 years because it is a famous round number. He would not be able to argue why the figure is not 2,000 years instead, or why people would die of natural causes at all.

Not all the billionaires of the world are investing in science to live long. Some Indian billionaires, for instance, pray to God. Most of the billionaires who have waged the war against ageing and death are from Silicon Valley because they are the sort of people who have been trained to believe that a problem, because it is a problem, must have a solution. Unity Biotechnology, one such effort funded by Jeff Bezos of Amazon and the venture capitalist Peter Thiel, among others, has declared, “Our medicines could make many debilitating consequences of ageing as uncommon as polio.”

There is a hypothesis, endorsed by the World Health Organisation (WHO), that the eradication of polio involved a beautiful transaction in society: Children who were fortunate to receive the oral polio vaccine would excrete the virus, and children who lived by the sewers, too, could, by chance, receive immunity from the disease. The rich and the poor have always lived this way, exchanging maladies and favours without intending to. The quest of the super rich to live long, too, would deeply affect those downstream. Whether most of the world wants it or not, longevity is going to be thrust down their soul.

The search has many strands. The National Academy of Medicine in the US has announced a $25 million (around Rs160 crore) prize for scientists who find breakthroughs. Google and the chairman of Apple, Arthur Levinson, have founded California Life Company, or Calico, which hopes to end the many diseases associated with ageing. In the grip of the science of longevity, scientists are experimenting on themselves. They are taking medication that might be prescribed for the general public only years later.

Writer and podcaster Timothy Ferriss, in his book Tools Of Titans, which reveals the philosophies and processes of very interesting and successful people, states that several people he has interviewed, including scientists, the rich, and fitness freaks, take Metformin, a drug that is usually prescribed for type 2 diabetes. They take the drug because it is believed to have the ability to prevent or kill cancer. Ferriss also documents a diet that is taking over some circles of America’s successful—the high-fat ketogenic-diet, whose goal is to make the body burn fat instead of carbohydrates, a process known as ketosis. This results in weight loss without significantly reducing muscle mass, improves mental alertness and creates other circumstances that are generally recognized as omens of a long, healthy life. The diet requires a person to fast for about 16 hours instead of the usual 8-10 that most of us observe in the form of sleep, and to eat foods that contain nearly 80% fat and almost no sugars. Malayalees may be delighted to know, and north Indians who live with them alarmed, that the odorous coconut oil is a venerated hero of this diet. Ferriss recommends adding it to coffee, instead of milk, but then do you love longevity that much?

Despite our reverence for science and the optimism of the tech billionaires, we really do not believe in immortality. There are, of course, some (almost) immortal (almost) living things—bacterial spores, for instance. There is a view that life on earth itself was seeded by immortal organic matter that travels across space on asteroids. But still, the body is the problem. It is very poorly designed for immortality. The mind, we suspect, can go on.

Google’s most famous computer scientist, Ray Kurzweil, believes that the next stage in the evolution of man is anthropogenic, or consciously influenced by humans—when we upload our minds to a computer. This is the only meaningful way, at least from the understanding that we have, that man can become immortal and the machine can have sense. Immortality and Artificial Intelligence (AI) in a single phenomenon.

The tech super rich have been obsessed with AI for reasons other than mere business potential. They are a breed of people who are not oppressed by any human. But, it appears, the human mind is lost without an oppressor. Hence their deep interest in AI, and often, its power to destroy the world. But Kurzweil’s theory, and Elon Musk’s more concrete attempt to upload the mind, make AI more endearing to the billionaires because it turns out AI is going to be, after all, us.

Kurzweil has predicted that machines and humans would merge in 2045. So, Dmitry Itskov, a Russian billionaire who made his money in journalism (strange things happen in Russia), has created the “2045 Initiative” which “aims to create technologies enabling the transfer of an individual’s personality to a more advanced non-biological carrier, and extending life, including to the point of immortality”.

Itskov recognizes the general grouse that such “non-biological” carriers would be only for the rich, so he has offered to make cheaper carriers. A Nano of sorts for the poorer minds.

Immortality might be hard to achieve in the next few decades, but exceptional longevity spanning two centuries might be probable. It would create new problems. Are the tech billionaires going to destroy all industries, all human jobs and then make everyone live thrice as long as now? What are most people supposed to do for, say, 200 years? Some, like the billionaires and me, would enjoy the extra century, but most people would be lost in the gigantic ocean of life. They are even now. And how tragic would it be then if one dies at 80. Also, what if one wishes to opt out at 90, saying this is enough: would that be suicide or wisdom?

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit Happiness Of Other People.





The war against Silicon Valley’s evil design


2017-05-12

We are addicted to anticipation. We check the phone many times every day to see if anything good has happened. According to a study, an average person checks his phone over 150 times a day. Some people unlock their phones over 900 times a day. And, we go to Facebook to be famous “to 15 people”, in the analysis of former Facebook employee Antonio Garcia Martinez, and to tolerate the good fortunes of others. And, there is WhatsApp too, where extroverts have a bit more to say about themselves.

We waste time. It is a character flaw, but when millions have the same flaw, it is also called human nature. The tech industry exploits our nature and steals our time.

The smartphone is designed consciously to drain away time. Most of the apps in it, especially social media and email, are designed to trap people for hours every day. And a movement is gathering force to liberate people from the phone, and to force Silicon Valley to adopt more ethical designs.

At the head of the movement is Tristan Harris, former product philosopher and “design ethicist” of Google, who advised the firm on how not to exploit human flaws. He frames the most transformative triumph of commercial design, the smartphone, as a casino “slot machine” because it enslaves people through hope. Gmail, Facebook, Tinder and other apps convert people into zombies who ask, in his opinion, “What am I going to get, what am I going to get next?”

In his TED talk, which was inevitable for a slim, ethical and successful American programmer, he said that every time we send a mail, even a work mail, we interrupt someone who would take “23 minutes” to get back to the interrupted task. In his talk, which was titled “How Better Tech Could Protect Us From Distraction”, he said that because modern distraction is a design problem, the solution would be in design. The protection against email intrusion, for instance, is in designing a more ethical mailing system, he said, where “Nancy” is allowed to switch on a “focus mode” that would prevent emails from reaching her inbox. The system can also be designed, he said, to let very important emails reach her. Also, Apple can be persuaded to design a phone that would warn a user that they have unlocked the phone over a dozen times in the past hour.

Harris, who is earnest, clever, pious and self-righteous, wants all designers in the tech industry to take a Hippocratic-like oath, swearing to put ethics above business interests. He is among those who think the opposite of greed is a monk in maroon robes. Not surprising then that he once organized a meeting of monks and programmers. One of the monks joked that instead of the “spellcheck” feature, programmers must code a “compassion check”. Are such inanities in the real world better than wasting time on Facebook?

In a short period of time, Harris has developed a reputation as the conscience of the Valley. It is a stature that the Valley itself has granted him. This is an unconscious defence mechanism of capitalism. It hoists some folk heroes quickly so that more lethal revolutionaries do not rise. The swift acceptance of its moral critics helps the Valley sustain, remarkably, the perception that it is largely an ethical place. Never in the history of capitalism has such a wealthy, exclusive and profitable confederation of lucky men maintained this commercially valuable reputation. Even so, Harris has begun to compare the tech industry to the tobacco and processed food businesses. That is how he blunts the most obvious argument against his movement—Aren’t people to blame for their distractions?

The Turkish writer Orhan Pamuk once scoffed at writers who said they could not finish their novels owing to distractions. He said, “Switch off your phones” and write (the great Alice Munro would have grumbled to herself, “Try raising children with the phone off”).

Harris is more sympathetic. He has suggested in his talks and news media interviews that the plight of an average person in the connected world is not very different from that of a smoker’s. A huge industry that employs thousands of people and spends billions of dollars is working very hard to keep us addicted. What chance do even the strong have? Even ascetics check their phones these days. Millions use the phone even to meditate.

The Valley profits immensely from the addiction. Global social media advertising doubled in two years to $31 billion (around Rs2 trillion) in 2016, but this is a small fraction of what the eventual spending will be. Some of the smartest minds in the world are working long hours to convert human distraction into more money even more efficiently. Why would the attention economy let us have our time back? That would be the equivalent of soft-drink manufacturers stopping the use of sugar.

Harris believes that people would be willing to pay, say $7 a month, to be part of a social network that does not use clever design to trap people and sell their time to advertisers. His ultimate goal is “time well spent”, which is also the name of the movement he co-founded. It is based on the notion that if people do not spend time on tech attractions, they would find something meaningful to do. He thinks that almost anything in the real world is better than staring at a screen. This is a popular overestimation of the physical world.

What is it that most people do most of the time? Everything considered, if we were to arrive at the most probable human pose at a given time of day, it would be of a person sitting by a window and staring at life. This might seem meaningful today when people have become zombies on the Web, but not long ago it was described as sloth. And what do most people do for fun in the real world? A man encounters another man at a party and says, “What’s up?”, the other one responds, “What’s up?”, and they look around to see if there is anyone more interesting. Then they would have ethanol with glucose and food that is, for all practical purposes, sugar. And this would be, most probably, in the nighttime, which would mean that they would wake up late next morning. This, too, is unhealthy.

Of course, there are healthier ways to meet people and very meaningful ways to enjoy the company of friends and family. But then there are healthier ways to enjoy social media too. Turn off the notifications, visit Facebook only once a day, do not click on the cat videos, read selectively and read Lounge. Harris, who himself does most of this, says that the tech companies make such habits extremely difficult. But then there are mammoth industries that make healthy fun and healthy eating almost impossible. People distinguish themselves by overcoming the hell that a majority has created. This is the way of the world.

Harris thinks that a world that has been enslaved by design aspires to do much better things with its time. But perhaps he overrates the world.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit Happiness Of Other People.





School’s out, what should our children do?


2017-05-19

In the summers, city children are made to undertake so many recreational activities, it is as though they are inmates of Tihar jail. They learn painting, origami, pottery, embroidery, music, karate and sports. Also, chocolate-making. It is a consequence of a colonial idea called the summer vacation. Parents are skilled in tormenting schools to achieve their ends but they have not moved to abolish the two-month-long break that takes summer, merely a season, too seriously.

Parents have not killed the summer vacation probably because they do not wish to appear as though they do not want to spend time with their children. It is inauspicious. Instead, in the summers they contribute to a huge cash-economy market for character-building activities. This is partly to get rid of their children for a few hours every day, and partly to prepare them for the serious business of life. An objective of a good family, after all, is to prepare its children to be better than a majority of the world’s children.

That children must do something useful with their time is part of the canon of modern parenting. Also that everything the child does has to be laced with the sugar of entertainment. As a result, children are constantly entertained, with only the degree changing, and they have come to expect life to be ceaselessly entertaining. But then there are many beautiful things in life that have to begin in tedium. Tedium has to be first given a chance.

I have started asking my daughter to get bored. It is, in reality, a popular idea and many parents around the world are aware of the charms of boredom.

This year, when I first asked my eight-year-old to get bored, she said I must help her, which seemed like an insult. I asked her to let her mind wander. She instead chose to consider some problems that scientists were struggling to solve. I asked her to figure out where space ended. She lay in bed trying to solve the puzzle. She said space did not end because space was all the time creating more space, like people created more people, which I thought was not a bad consequence of letting the mind wander. But then after an hour she asked if she was real or a video game inside a gigantic iPad, and I thought maybe I should let her watch one of those stupid serials for children on Netflix.

The scholarly view on boredom is that it inspires a child to overcome the ennui by creating something marvellous. It is true that children, when solitary and bored, end up writing stories or painting or taking apart objects to see what is inside. It seems appropriate that most children themselves are magnificent products of two adults in the gentle rot of happy life who then decide to search for greater meaning.

Among psychologists and some parents, there is a celebration of the idea of boredom. Even though I believe in the idea of boredom I feel they are overrating the force of the concept. Many of us, who had a very boring childhood and adolescence, and who did reasonable things as a consequence, did so because we did not have a choice. It was a time, though not long ago, when the world did not try hard to entertain a child. Pilgrimage, then, was vacation. Also, a family’s economic condition and the dysfunctions of parents greatly contributed to a child’s boredom. Boredom was a roll of the dice, and some of us made the best use of it. But children today live in a world where distraction is the very goal of giant industries, and parents can afford to spend a lot of money to entertain them.

Boredom can never be planted in a child because her mind will always try to liberate itself from the lull, and succeed. If we force it on her by denying her the things her peers enjoy, then the moment she finds independence, she would forsake boredom anyway. How then can boredom be instilled as an intellectual subsystem in a little person?

The hypothesis that boredom would inspire an impressive rescue act in a child and make her do stuff is an opportunistic way of looking at a very important sentiment. The whole point of boredom is that it promises no reward, it trains the mind to be solitary and to introspect without the requirement of excitement. If the capacity for boredom is instilled in a child as the ability to be alone without entertainment, excitement, or even purpose, for long periods of time, that would be the seeding of a very useful faculty.

The arch-enemy of introspection is not entertainment, but education. There is a whole stream of very important things a child has to learn, a stream that intensifies as she grows up. It is easy to defame entertainment, and modern parents have done that as well as parents a generation ago had defamed love and sex, but not everyone has the courage to defame education. Children have no choice today but to learn many things that everybody is telling them are important. In time they will learn things that they love, mostly they will learn things they despise. And they will neglect many of their dreams. All through, they are going to be too busy to be bored.

Recently, Bill Gates sent out advice to fresh graduates in a series of tweets. He told them: “AI, energy and biosciences are promising fields where you can make a huge impact. It’s what I would do if starting out today.” But his first tweet in the series said that predictions can look very silly in the future, and he had posted a clip of a moment from the film The Graduate, where a man is telling a young man, “I want to say one word to you. Just one word…Are you listening?…Plastics…There’s a great future in plastics.”

Yet, it is hard for children to ignore the fields that the world’s most influential people are claiming to be the future. Not surprising then that children are already beginning to learn coding in their summer breaks. In the middle of all this, as they fully ingest the melancholy of preparing for life, it is probably unfair to remind them to practise sitting alone and doing nothing.

Maybe the capacity for boredom is an innate trait, or maybe it is a gift of circumstances, or maybe it is a combination of the two. What is certain is that we will not be able to teach introspective boredom to our children. They will seek a hectic life from the universe, and the universe would most likely grant them that.

Maybe parents have not abolished the summer vacation because summers do get easier as the child grows up. You don’t have to ask them to get bored. They are not in your path the way they were earlier. You don’t know when exactly it happened but suddenly they have friends and gangs and life. And it is you who craves their attention, and it is they who then ask you to go get bored.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit Happiness Of Other People.





Are motivational talks useful?


2017-05-26

The discovery of the happiest human, a few years ago, was convincing to the extent that the person turned out to be a man. Everything else was suspect. He was French. Yet another European who had fled family and civilization to don maroon robes and live as a monk in the Himalayas. About such men, the Kerala police would say that they are only hiding from their police. The fact is that a neuroscientist studied Matthieu Ricard for over a decade, even attached many electrodes to his skull, and claimed that the frequency of the gamma waves emanating from his brain was unusual. That meant nothing really. The link between a brain’s gamma waves and consciousness is nothing more than popular pseudo-science. But journalists declared him “the happiest man”. Ricard then travelled to unhappy parts of the world and delivered talks on happiness.

Thousands listen to him, an act they consider very important, possibly transformative. He is not a charlatan, he is a philosopher who has highly influential notions about happiness. He is funny and wise. But is he as useful to his listeners as they imagine? Are they mistaking entertainment for a life hack?

His central message is that we should want less and thus find happiness. It is hard to argue with the message, but then it is a familiar one. For thousands of years, men in unusual costumes have said the same thing. Even Baloo to Mowgli in The Jungle Book: “Look for the bare necessities. The simple bare necessities. Forget about your worries and your strife.”

Ricard is a bit more complex than Baloo; he says that any brain can be altered through mind exercises, which is a reasonable and an important argument. But still, are people transformed when they hear such words? Or do they remain the same because they do not possess the neurological system that can nudge them to make the choices Ricard made for himself?

What Ricard and all motivational speakers, including Baloo, are actually saying is, “Be like me. Why can’t you be like me?” And that is among the most futile instructions in the history of human communication.

There are broadly five kinds of inspirational talks: the billionaire’s advice to college students; a celebrity’s triumph against a misfortune; a social underdog’s passage to success; a successful person’s praise of failure and losers; and a general suggestion that you must do the very opposite of whatever it is that you are doing right now.

One of the most famous inspirational speeches was delivered by the co-founder of Apple, the late Steve Jobs, at Stanford in 2005. He was on an ascent once again. It was before the launch of the iPhone but the new Mac, iPod and Pixar had already promised him a place in history. One morning, a year earlier, he had been diagnosed with an incurable form of pancreatic cancer, but in the evening that same day, the doctors realized that it was a rare, curable form of cancer. When he delivered the commencement address, Jobs did not know that he was not off the hook yet. He spoke about death, being a college dropout, and failure. He told the students: “The only way to do great work is to love what you do. If you haven’t found it yet, keep looking. Don’t settle.” He said it again later, “Don’t settle.” His most famous words were probably, “Your time is limited, so don’t waste it living someone else’s life. Don’t be trapped by dogma—which is living with the results of other people’s thinking. Don’t let the noise of others’ opinions drown out your own inner voice.”

The speech has been viewed online millions of times and its text has probably been read by as many. But I assume that an overwhelming majority of his audience, especially the Stanford students, do not love their present jobs, they settle every day, their lives are filled with compromises and they raise loving families purely through their professional caution and artistic defeats. Most of Jobs’ listeners, and the youth who will listen to him in the future, will live “someone else’s life” because they cannot come up with their own; they will be “trapped in dogma”, in fact they would be lost without dogma; and they will “let the noise of others’ opinions drown out” their own because they do not have strong opinions. They are not Steve Jobs, hence they will never be him. Jobs did attempt to inspire but he was, in reality, asking people to be like him.

So did film-maker George Lucas when he said, “We are all living in cages with the door wide open.” I know people who love the quote, who mention it in their brief bios, but they have spent their whole lives locking their cage doors because the forest outside is scary. The world is filled with people who would cherish billionaire Richard Branson’s declaration that “you don’t learn to walk by following rules”, but they are the same conformists who torture the few who try to break the rules.

Jobs, in his speech, also told the students: “For the past 33 years, I have looked in the mirror every morning and asked myself: ‘If today were the last day of my life, would I want to do what I am about to do today?’ And whenever the answer has been ‘No’ for too many days in a row, I know I need to change something.”

This part of his speech is curious because he begins the strand with a contradictory view—“if you live each day as if it was your last, someday you’ll most certainly be right.” This, in fact, is the view of the majority. That when it is not the last day of your life, it is extremely dangerous to live as if it is.

The transformative powers of motivational talks appear to be vastly overstated. But they certainly are not merely entertainment that people misunderstand as modern scripture. The most precious thing about a motivational talk is not motivation, it is something else.

Poetry has failed to capture most of the world because it calls itself poetry. But when it names itself pop or rock or folk, it becomes mainstream culture. Literature is most powerful when it is not called that. And that is what the finest motivational talks do.

Couched as self-improvement, motivational talks take the beauty and power of literature and its ability to sting with insights, to a vast innocent audience that asks the most foolish question of our times, “What is the takeaway?” People then sit and listen to billionaires and monks, thinking they are in the sway of profitable inspiration, but in reality it is the trance of the good old story.

This is not to say that motivational talks do not motivate at all, and that they have none of the materialistic uses that people who ask for “takeaway” wish for. Such talks do transform but not everyone, not the millions. It transforms a few, the exceptional who are as talented or odd as the orators. That is why the most misleading aspect of a great motivational talk is that it is popular.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit Happiness Of Other People. The writer tweets at @manujosephsan





What makes a novel lie


2017-06-10

About two years ago, a serious man and I got into a public spat that unfortunately did not escalate into a fistfight. The quarrel began during a panel discussion after I said that the “literary novel” today is a warning to readers that they are going to be bored by self-absorbed memoirs, activism and sociology lessons masquerading as stories. And a story is, very simply, something that is fascinating.

For most of human history that has been the definition of a story. Zia Haider Rahman, a British citizen of Bangladeshi extraction, argued that there are many other things in a novel that are more important than an entertaining story, like the facts of life. A man in the audience asked him why he bothered writing fiction then. “Write non-fiction.” Rahman thought the question was foolish, so he said, “That’s a rhetorical question, right?” The questioner did not know what a rhetorical question was, so that was that.

The question was reasonable, and it has a simple answer. A writer has a story to tell, which may be based in facts but cannot be entirely factual, hence he presents it as fiction, a form that also allows many features that journalism does not. The more interesting question is, why do facts matter so much to modern novelists and literary referees? Almost every novelist is flogging the “facts” in their fiction—the almost facts, spatial facts, political facts, historical facts, marital facts, private facts. And critics tend to celebrate the “facts”. Even “imagination” these days has come to mean not creation, but a brilliant literary interpretation of facts.

In our high-strung, political times, have novelists come to believe that a story in itself is unimportant, that fabrication is frivolous? Do they assume a hierarchy of literary things in which they rate fiction lower than facts?

Didn’t Svetlana Alexandrovna Alexievich, who won the Nobel for literature in 2015, once say, “…document in art is becoming increasingly interesting while art as such often proves impotent”? Most novelists do feel terrible when they discover great facts through hard work but have to offer them up as fabrication. Also, are novelists themselves in the spell of the “takeaway” neurosis of our age that has conditioned the reader to view time as an investment and expect something useful from reading, like knowledge, rather than mere literary experience?

Readers do appear to value facts in fiction. At the Jaipur Literature Festival a few months ago, Richard Flanagan, who won the Man Booker Prize in 2014 for The Narrow Road To The Deep North, told me a story that he has related many times. He was on stage in California with an American novelist, who explained in great detail how she researched her novel, how she set up numerous interviews and how she collected hundreds of documents. When Flanagan was asked by the moderator how he had researched his novel, he said, “I’m Australian, we’re a bit lazy, we just make it up.” There were 2,000 people in the audience, he said, and there was the silence of disgrace.

For a novel that derives some of its power from the alleged psychopathic brutality of Japanese soldiers, the author interviewed only two former Japanese soldiers, a confession that might diminish the novel for some readers. But Flanagan did widely advertise one of the two interviews. Slapping was a common form of punishment in the Japanese war camps, and Flanagan, as part of his slim research, asked the guard to slap him (after the third slap, he thought “the room was spinning” but it was just an earthquake that had struck the region).

Flanagan told me that research is overrated in a novel. What he uses are not facts but a simulation of facts. The literary worth of the novel is in the intuition of the writer, and his ability to make conjectures of emotions he has not personally experienced. But not all novels can get away with simulation of facts.

When I began reading Adam Johnson’s The Orphan Master’s Son, which won the Pulitzer in 2013, I felt lucky to enter the physical spaces of North Korea through a literary work of high order, but then I read his interview, in which he said he had visited North Korea only once. “It’s an unverifiable place,” he said. “But to the fiction writer, the myth, the legend, the fables are all powerful tools to create a psychological portrait.”

I had to downgrade his book to fantasy, which is not the same as fiction. As an Indian who had read clownish stories set in India by expatriates, I could not waste any more time on a book that a North Korean would find preposterous. In a novel where a whole nation is a character, the author’s grasp of the society and its daily objects cannot be on the level of a foreign correspondent’s.

Fiction need not be factual, but it should never be fake. A novel is fake not when it lies but when at its core it is not true. A great novel fabricates a probable and absorbing story, it distorts real events, manufactures entertainment, it invents pace and conflates many real humans into a few characters, but still it has to tell us truths. A man before sex, Amos Oz tells us, is different from a man after sex. If you don’t cry at your mother’s funeral, Albert Camus tells us, the world will destroy you when it gets a chance. If you recount the stories of your ancestors without the arrogance of interpretation, Gabriel García Márquez showed, all our histories would resemble magic. We understand the truths of our times not only through the facts of journalism but also through truths that we did not know existed, but the moment we read, we accept them immediately as though we always knew them.

As sacred as facts are to journalism, authenticity is the heart of a novel, especially a novel that can be considered art. Many complex things go on in a work of fiction. You cannot convert journalism into fiction by just lying about a few things. A few years ago, when it came to light that Truman Capote’s iconic work of journalism, In Cold Blood, was fabricated in parts, The Guardian did something foolish. It included the book among the 100 best novels written in English. As In Cold Blood was devised as journalism by its celebrated author, it did not go into the minds of the characters. And that is exactly where fiction can go and journalism is not permitted. In Cold Blood had no voice, no point of view, no living conscience. It was fabricated documentation, and as a novel, mediocre. Fiction is the least important definition of a novel.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit Happiness Of Other People. His Twitter handle is @manujosephsan





You, according to fake news


2017-06-17

A good lie is never known as a lie. A famous lie is a different matter. A lie that is famously a lie is the very opposite of a good lie. How then does it become popular? In the answer lies the true nature of “fake news”, which is an unsatisfactory name given to a broad range of things—fabricated information, propaganda, rumours, pranks and hoaxes.

You may have wondered why you are reading so many articles about fake news these days. The matter appears to be an internal crisis of journalism, so why must you be bothered so often by what interests journalists? But fake news is almost entirely about you. According to mainstream intellectual opinion, you are often a victim of fake news, a gullible simpleton who falls for any nonsense you read free of cost on the Internet, which you then transmit to your friends. But it is this hypothesis that is too simple. Something else is going on.

Several months ago, after Prime Minister Narendra Modi introduced Rs2,000 notes, word spread that the notes were the most technologically advanced currency ever, so sophisticated that they could be traced by the government, even tracked a few metres underground, which was a nice touch. The popularity of the lie was on a par with the best lies that US President Donald Trump’s campaign had generated. For instance, the news that the Pope had endorsed his campaign. Most observers appear to believe that such lies contribute to the popularity of notorious public figures. But if this view were true, lies would be universally helpful, and the liar with the highest marketing budget would win. But that is not how it goes. All lies are not equal, and the most successful lies appear to help only a particular type of people.

When a public figure is immensely popular but reviled by an intellectual elite that has an outsized influence over the respectable media, then he does not become even more popular because a piece of fiction has gone viral. Rather, what appears more probable is that the piece of fiction goes viral because of the popularity of the public figure. Modi and Trump and Russian President Vladimir Putin did not become popular because of the lies. The lies became popular because of them. Successful fake news contains excellent storytelling techniques—it has a strong protagonist who is very interesting because he is unpredictable, blunt and morally ambiguous, it captures the current of the times and it appears to be highly probable. It succeeds for the same reason that good yarns work well. People wish to believe it.

Truth is always slower than a convenient lie. That is why health myths, for instance, go deeper into the minds of people than health facts. The half-truth that exercise could make you fatter than sloth would always be more popular than the truth that complete abstinence from refined carbohydrates will have a profound effect on your well-being.

I do not suggest that fake news does not create misinformation at all, just that its transformative powers are overstated.

Yuval Noah Harari, a historian who is best known for his book Sapiens, argues that the very success of the human race lies in its ability to believe in fiction, which according to him includes religion and all political and economic ideologies. “Ever since the Stone Age, self-reinforcing myths have served to unite human collectives. Indeed, Homo sapiens conquered this planet thanks above all to the unique human ability to create and spread fictions,” he wrote in a Bloomberg View column. “The truth is that truth was never high on the agenda of Homo sapiens.”

Harari is speaking of powerful forces, like delusions and their ability to travel fast. Modern fake news is not always driven by such major elements. It is, instead, the minor after-effect of colossal fiction that has already been established, like the news of an idol drinking milk or the statue of a Jewish virgin shedding tears are minor effects of the establishment of two gigantic works of fiction.

The idea that a hugely popular lie is not influential but a reflection of current beliefs, should alter our perception of the most organized form of fake news—propaganda. Propaganda is usually generated by a dominant political force. The perception that propaganda was how, historically, evil men influenced ordinary people, is itself a form of fake news. Over the decades, artists and academics, who make a living out of sympathizing with social underdogs, have successfully created the myth that ordinary people are victims of propaganda. The German public of Hitler’s time, for instance, is only mildly implicated in his crimes while the fact is that their political views and disposition made it possible for the propaganda to be successful.

The conscientious liberals lament fascist propaganda and other forms of fake news but they, too, generate or transmit it. But their fake news never travels as fast and as wide as the right-wing fake news, and is almost never as successful. A few days ago, some people were excited by the cover of Time magazine, which is taken seriously these days only when there is a hoax. The cover called Donald Trump “Liar-in-chief”. Not surprisingly, intellectuals of a type loved it and passed it around. But when they realized it was a hoax, they had to take it down to guard their own reputation, and take it down with sheepish notes about how the image had come from very credible sources, how they were so very sorry for promoting a hoax.

About 15 years ago, the novelist and activist Arundhati Roy used some strands of fake news in her essay on the Gujarat riots. One suggested that Congress MP Ehsan Jafri’s daughter had been stripped and murdered, while she was safe thousands of kilometres away. Roy had no choice but to tender an apology, however grudging.

The transmission of liberal fake news is often slowed this way—by the strict requirements of decency. But intellectuals fall for and transmit fake news for the same reason that semi-literates do: The news corroborates their delusions.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit Happiness Of Other People.





Are you a village, or a city?


2017-06-24

These days there is much love for farmers among people who do not meet farmers. In their imagination, farmers are earthy, ancient and genuine, like noble organic vegetables. In the English-language media, farmers have attained the same status as “techies”—they are a flock of same people to whom stuff happens.

Rich, poor, male, female, high-caste, Dalit, the Bihari farm worker and Kannadiga planter, are all just farmers. And the farmers themselves have caught on to this. In March, a group of Tamil farmers went to Delhi to protest in green loin cloths and garlands made out of exhumed skulls that they claimed belonged to farmers who had committed suicide. They also held live mice and parts of dead snakes between their teeth to get the attention of the prime minister so that he would waive their loans. No other class of people could have gotten away with wearing human-skull garlands and biting live mice, but they were farmers.

If poor farmers had not become the mascots of all farmers, they would have been identified clearly as the primary foes of the urbane crowd. Farmers, though scholars of the land, are the same entrepreneurs who spray chemicals to make their produce look fresh. The rich among them don’t pay taxes. They are the largest consumers of freshwater—irrigation alone takes up over 80% of Indian freshwater, chiefly to grow high-carb crops, like rice, that are heavily subsidized too. They also consume free or cheap electricity. There is a more important reason why the farmer is the natural foe of the liberal urbane—the farmer is a villager.

In the villager live the instincts and compulsions of a primordial tribal. He can survive only as part of the herd. As a result, identity is everything to him. He must preserve caste, and social hierarchies, and religious venoms, and the place of men over women. He might be an oppressed man but to everybody who is below him, he is an oppressor too. He cherishes a type of order that keeps the hierarchies in place. He considers social order “tradition”, and civil disorder “freedom”.

B.R. Ambedkar had contempt for the Indian village. The liberation of Dalits, he was clear, involved their liberation from the village. Urban migration was then, as it is now, not merely about economics, but also a pursuit of anonymity for those for whom identity is a curse.

The villager does not live in villages alone. In fact, cities have become the more powerful bastions of the feudal village. Villagers fill Parliament, the legislative assemblies and municipal bodies. They fill government offices. They run big and small businesses too. They are in the richest ghettos of Mumbai. Residences are segregated, even in Mumbai, by community, religion and diet. Once I assumed the name of “Mohammed Khan” and tried to rent a house in the plushest parts of south Mumbai. It seemed impossible.

The village is not a place, it is a mind. We know men who study in the best colleges in the US but the moment they return to India, they transform into feudal lords because that is what they are and that is what brings them peace. Equality takes away most of their social fortunes. Many such feudal lords do not look like bad people at all. In fact, they resemble reformers. They couch their wish to preserve their privileges as a desire to preserve culture, heritage and traditions. They are disturbed by the urbanization of rural spaces, and the creeping ambiguity of social hierarchies. In protest, they romanticize the village as though it is a part of geology that should never change.

The city, too, is a mind. It is planted in people who do not wish to gain from their identity, or cannot gain from it; and people who have the capacity to leave their herd. The true city person is someone who can separate his family, which he may love, from the cultural shell that houses the family. He may initially profit from the privileges of his birth, but eventually wishes to break away. If the villager wants social order and civil disorder, the city mind wants social disorder and civil order. He is a cultural sponge who absorbs everything, and an intellectual parasite who lives off the latest streams of knowledge emanating from the most vibrant cities. “He” is often a she. A city, after all, is a woman’s good friend. Not that women cannot be feudal, a laughable thought.

The city mind is not always glorious, however. As the city imitates dominant cultures of its time, it is often held in the sway of impoverishing fancy ideas, like borrowed socialism and hollow political correctness. Also, a club of unoriginal city minds who are besotted with imported ideas are always at risk of becoming villagers themselves.

The battle for modernity is always the battle between the idea of the village and the idea of the city. So who is winning?

Most people in the world are probably villagers. In this light, the city has done very well. It has had a profound and disproportionate influence over the world. It has framed progress as a migration from ancient times to modern times. We must not take this sense of direction for granted. It can collapse, as has happened in Afghanistan and Syria, and to a degree, even in Mumbai. Society is then transported back by years or decades or centuries.

The villagers are clawing back, especially the villagers who are entrenched in the cities. All over the world, the meaning of rising conservatism is that the village is fighting back. Prosperity has made people fear losing what they have, and to feel secure they resort to the mafiadom of large useful groups. They are doing what villagers are best at—ganging up against people who are not like them.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit Happiness Of Other People.

He tweets at @manujosephsan





Why we search for meaning in Roger Federer


2017-06-30

The antimatter of literature might be sports commentary. In sports commentary, intense men convey excitement by being excitable, they repeat things, scream clichés, describe matters that are in plain sight as though for the blind, and use poor metaphors. For instance, the batsman they called “The Wall”, Rahul Dravid, has the world record for losing his stumps the highest number of times in Test cricket. And they called Shoaib Akhtar, who was the fastest bowler of his generation, “Rawalpindi Express”, a Pakistani train that was slower than him. These metaphors have stuck because, unlike literature, sports commentary is influential.

In commentary, an observation is what is seen and reported. In literature, an observation is what is seen, then remembered, imagined, interpreted or recounted in a manner that makes the self-centred reader mistakenly relate to it. Roger Federer, who has begun his 19th campaign for the Wimbledon title, would have been a subject of commentary alone (“Did you see that”, “Genius”, “What a beauty”) if it were not for some qualities that have attracted the attention of literature (“Roger Federer As Religious Experience”).

The above-mentioned piece of literature was by the American writer David Foster Wallace, who himself was “a near great junior tennis player”, in his own words. The essay published in The New York Times in 2006 was, in large swathes of prose, an unsentimental analysis of Federer’s game, the nature of muscles and the technology of new rackets, but it was at its core a tribute to his artistic beauty, the impossibility of some of his shots, and the inexplicable, “metaphysical” nature of his game. Wallace never once used the expression “religious experience”. He was the sort of man who would prefer “spiritual” to “religious”. He borrowed the term from a bus driver whose analysis of Federer’s game was “bloody near-religious experience”. It was a description that Wallace, and the hundreds of thousands who read the essay, endorsed. In 2008, Wallace killed himself; it brought a level of fame to the article that was unprecedented for a sports essay.

Beauty in sports has become an underdog. It has, oddly, become a form of weakness that is thrashed by the brute force of power. But Federer is the revenge of beauty. No other athlete today represents so many facets of grace. In him is the victory of elegance over power, as though in the fable of modern sports, elegance is somehow moral and muscular power is evil. Also, even though nobody refers to Federer’s beauty as feminine, its arch-villains are usually depicted as manly things. This despite the fact that he has considerable manly power himself. And his perfection is somehow rated higher than the perfection of players whose shots are not as attractive as his.

He is not about beauty alone any more. He radiates meaning depending on who the observer is. That he is 35 and still a top-level athlete would not have been such a surprise if most people in their 30s, especially sports journalists, were fit. His endurance as a professional athlete informs his fans of the seeming connection between grace and longevity. His more muscular arch-rival, Rafael Nadal, has been ruined by injuries while Federer has, largely, waltzed along. Also, in the unspoken perception of his observers, his wife Mirka, who has lived in public memory almost as long as his fame, even as the more glamorous partners of his contemporaries have proven to be seasonal, lends him a certain depth as a man. His ability to cry publicly, they associate with how much tennis matters to him. Privately, most women, if not all, appear to be annoyed by his propensity to burst into tears, and even in that there is a lesson for his male fans—that they should not be fooled into believing that it is all right for modern men to cry.

Tennis, as it is an individual game (so is cricket, but that argument another day), does not convey obvious management lessons—especially Roger Federer’s game. Genius, style and beauty translate very poorly in management talk. But an integral part of corporate bull today is the linking of every major sporting phenomenon to management lessons. Team sports, like football, are the beloved of gurus who wish to convey the importance of “team effort”, which is very simply the supremacy of a group of ordinary men over the stardom of the genius. Federer, even though he stands to disprove almost every cherished management lesson about the importance of the ordinary, is too big and too popular for the gurus to ignore. So even they are forced to see meaning in him.

There are icons in other sports who have inspired writers to see more than what is obvious. Almost all of Brazilian football would qualify. Tiger Woods, once upon a time. Magnus Carlsen, for the few who can understand why his chess is beautiful. Sachin Tendulkar, of course. But Federer has one quality that the other comparable athletes do not possess, a quality that is important to the elite anywhere even though the establishment does not explicitly speak about it—he is posh, like them. He is capable of speaking about his sport and his own game with a degree of sophistication. In him, finally, there is a relationship between sporting aesthetics and social refinement. But despite his articulation in at least three of the world’s most influential languages, he does not seem to have a significant view about most of the esoteric things that are said about him. His legend appears to be partly the imagination of those who wish to see in him a grand victory for beauty.

I must confess that I am among the writers who has seen more in him than he probably does himself. I have undertaken a pilgrimage to Shanghai to watch him in a stadium, up close, to confirm my theories about him. For example, I wish to see in Federer the true meaning of style, which is that it is not a form of rebellion against the norms but in fact the perfect adoption of conventional wisdom. Also, in an unspoken war of our times—between the stylish, who stand for beauty, versus the efficient, who stand for getting things done—I want to believe Federer is nature’s sly admission that it is on the side of style. Also in him, I wish to believe, is the proof that sometimes the most beautiful thing in us is also the least efficient. Like Roger Federer’s backhand.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit Happiness Of Other People. He tweets at @manujosephsan





Does disorder comfort Indians?


2017-07-08

In any city in the developed world, the edges of a road are never crooked, and median markings run straight, forever. Cars stay in their lanes even down a sharp bend, as though in orbit around some unseen centre of sophistication. And they stop at the red light, behind a straight line, and when they do, there is so much silence and stillness, I often mistake them for parked cars. Also, the pavements are broad and made of expensive stone, as though pedestrians matter. Why does this dismay Indians?

Why is it that after a short period of enjoying the rich world, they long to go back “home”, to a place where there is order only when viewed from about a kilometre in the air. As the plane descends, the sharp edges of roads become ambiguous, the geometric lines of civilization dissolve into irregular forms, and the neat clusters of homes begin to look like infestations. On the roads, grace is naïve, almost foolish. And the air is filled with particles, and loud sounds. Why does the re-entry into total civic chaos comfort Indians? Even make them happy? Happy in a conditional, all-things-considered way, but still happy. And what fills them with gloom in advanced economies? Tourists, even residents, share this feeling.

Some say those places do not have “a soul”, that the people are too formal, and life is somehow lonely. Some say it just is not home. Some are more explicit and may arrive at the heart of the syndrome. They say what disturbs them about the developed world is what they love for the first few days or weeks, exactly why they like to visit those places—the order, the precious rules, the straight lines and perfect circles of life, the dignity of formality, the quiet of sophistication, the ease of everything.

Can Indians really despise order so much? When humans say we are animals, don’t we actually mean it in a poetic, metaphorical way? How can we dislike order when it is so obviously an important objective as a species? Is order a requirement of white DNA, an invention of Christianity, is it yet another neurosis of a minority that has colonized the majority?

My general suspicion of refined Indians pushes me to believe that they have devised romantic notions about their love for disorder to camouflage what really torments them in the developed world—the collapse of street social hierarchy. They are not the elites any more. In fact, many of them suddenly become the underclass in those places. But this hypothesis is diminished, if not destroyed, by the fact that even poor Indians, when displaced and put in advanced economies, are somewhat disoriented by order. Also, Westerners themselves, including sober people, seem to see meaning in the chaos here, though not when they have to drive themselves or in other such circumstances.

There might be some beauty in disorder, something that appeals to an innate human idea of freedom. It has its miseries but saves Indians from the boredom of being universal. And it is not just about how everyone drives.

Last year, my Uber driver stopped the car, took his water bottle from under his seat and went to have a dump by the roadside. I was in the car, on the shoulder of an eight-lane expressway that connects the national capital to its most affluent suburb, waiting for a man to finish shitting, a man who had been introduced to me by a complex algorithm funded by billions of postmodern money. I wondered if that moment there, as I was waiting for the man to finish his business, was culture. If economic progress marked the end of such moments, would it not be a destruction of something intrinsically Indian, or at least something that is intrinsically a quirk of poverty? Poverty is not only an economic condition, it is also a very distinct line of human behaviour. Could that moment have happened in Europe? The event had two distinct parts—the cab driver stopping on the shoulder of the expressway, and the man doing his business on the wayside of an expressway. Maybe there was a third part. The customer letting it happen, waiting in the car patiently. None of the parts would have been possible in an affluent nation. The value of the moment was not that it was amusing (it was not), but that it could happen.

Symmetry is the only form of order in nature. The rest is not chaos, but not order either. So maybe people see in absolute order something unnatural, perhaps an enslavement to authority. We can see this resentment even in the new financial regime that the government is attempting to bring about. The resistance to change is not merely from those who wish to hate everything that Narendra Modi tries to do, but also from regular Indians who are beginning to feel that the government is squeezing all the informality out of economics.

There is a difference between freedom, which is feral, and liberty, which is a human invention—the idea that we must surrender our freedoms to a benign authority who would then grant a restricted number of freedoms.

A consequence of urban order is often the optics of loneliness. The more advanced an administration is, the more efficiently it is able to hide its humans, and other animals. That is why the first reaction of Indians in many beautiful urban suburbs of the world is—“where are the people?” This is not only because most places have fewer people than Indians are used to, but also because urban planning and order thin the visible density of people. The disorder of India, apart from showing us people and cows and pigs, also converts the nation into a giant video game. Every moment in public space is a navigation through unpredictable events, sometimes dangerous, but mostly only difficult.

Triumphing over the many daily odds, and surviving the republic, or witnessing from very close others doing just that, probably gives us a certain depth that filling a more efficient life with frivolities would not. Maybe Indians veer towards disorder because it saves us from a dull life. An orderly, safe life, but a dull one.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit Happiness Of Other People. He tweets at @manujosephsan





Why the poor don’t kill us


2017-07-22

Across the nation maids are talking back; who knows one day they may even demand long-handle mops to clean the floors. The rich wonder if it is all because of the employment guarantee schemes conceived by the profligate Congress government—the poor seem to have options these days. The wages, too, have soared. In any case, the middle class, at least the young and the refined, want to be nice to their servants. The conscientious sahib even exclaims on social media how cruel it is that maids are “expected to be invisible”. The madam, though as conscientious, is unlikely to say that, or let the maid use her toilet or the cutlery. Across urban homes, however, the maids are sitting on footstools, even chairs, in the presence of their employers. If there is a time-lapse video of seated maids across a stretch of 10 years, it would show them slowly soaring from floor to sofa. Also, the maids today are not the tragic malnourished women of once upon a time. And their infants are roly-poly.

A cluster of apartment blocks called Mahagun Moderne in Noida, adjacent to Delhi, where hundreds of maids worked, was not very different from the rest of the urban hives until a few days ago, when a riot broke out. A mob of maids and their men attacked the society after one of the maids, a young woman, went missing and her family thought she had been detained by a family that had earlier accused her of stealing money.

Similar scuffles have occurred in other parts of Delhi. The occurrences are rare but they may be a portent of what is to come. The master-servant equilibrium of Indian society is collapsing. The poor are becoming socially and politically more empowered than ever before.

What is surprising is why they do not attack more often. How does vast poverty tolerate the wealth of a few, who are vulgar just to appear so rich in plain sight. Many a time, even if you are just walking with an ice cream in hand, you feel you are taunting the poor. Why don’t the poor rise in revolt and cause end-of-days havoc? Order suits the rich. Chaos is a leveller. Do the poor overestimate the defences of the rich? Why are we safe?

There is a type of phoney Indian who would, with flared noble nostrils, say the poor will not do it because they are such wonderful folk. But just as foolish is the innate suspicion of rich India that the poor are prone to criminality and violence, and that they are kept in check by religious or other mystical forces. But the fact is India’s poor shun violence for the same reasons most human beings abhor violence. They wish to be humane.

There is something far less pleasant that guards the rich—the near absence of human rights for the poor in a police station or a prison, or in the rest of the judicial process. India is not a safe place for the rich but it is safer than it should be, or even compared to more mature economies like South Africa, because the consequences of crimes against the rich are severe in India. Mumbai’s underworld, for example, was an organized attempt by gangs to steal from the rich, but when they began to employ efficient lawyers and use the legal process to free their captured men, society responded through extrajudicial killings of criminals. What India lacks through order it often makes up through informality. The less democratic a nation, the safer it is for the rich. Street safety in China, it will not surprise us, is much better than in India.

But the most important reason why it is hard for anyone to organize India’s poor against the rich is that such a system already exists—in the form of electoral politics. As long as the poor believe that they own politics, they will find greater release in that legitimate revolution than in self-destructive rage.

Indian politics thus is largely a revenge of the poor, or at least an attempt. That is one of the reasons why demonetization did not destroy the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), as the liberals had hoped. The party has won more than 10 elections since that announcement. The poor thought the rich suffered more than them.

Everything considered, the rich are great beneficiaries of poverty. It is very cheap to be rich in India. As the chief economic adviser, Arvind Subramanian, pointed out, the subsidies that the rich so hate are designed for the poor but are best experienced by the rich. But the benefits are not as trivial as being served by a maid who would skin hundreds of soya beans for hours and crush them into milk. In a poor nation, the social elite can pass through life without facing any substantial competition. That is why the frequent middle-class accusation of “nepotism” in the film industry is somewhat amusing—not just Bollywood dynasties, almost the entire Indian upper class owes its supremacy to the huge advantages its families have provided.

The poor also serve the rich by providing them a clear moral goal—eradicate poverty. Every learned Indian is a poverty eradication thinker. Many among the elite youth lament “inequality”, though all they have to do to reduce inequality is, instead of lamenting, refuse to go to expensive American colleges, and boycott inheritance. In the sheer absurdity of the youth even considering such a drastic sacrifice lies a more disturbing question—can the beneficiaries of inequality really end it? In their subterranean minds, do they actually wish inequality to continue?

As the nation transforms and the facile deference and the isolation of the poor dissolves, the rich are responding by paying a premium for places and experiences that will not be diminished by the other kind of Indians. When India is expensive, it is not because it has something of value to offer, it is the price one pays for keeping the riff-raff out.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit Happiness Of Other People.

He tweets at @manujosephsan





When our problems become sacred


2017-07-29

He is the new underclass among writers; the guy has no wounds. He is male and heterosexual; he is not a Dalit; he has never been beaten by the spouse; nor abandoned by parents as a child. He is never depressed, not even in the mountains, not even when there is a power cut and a dog howls. He has never been evicted from his place of birth, so he does not go there. And for the same reason, he is unable to write with sentimental anger about the exact green of the “backwaters”, how heavenly the smell of the egg roast is, and how beautiful the healthy women on the morning streets who never dry their hair properly before leaving home are. He does not live in the West under the supervision of a dominant, foreign and affluent race, so he has no reason to seek refuge in his identity. He is not a wealthy feudal lord in decline, or a middle-aged humanities intellectual who wishes to get laid through “empathy”; as a result, he is incapable of proxy-feminism, Marxism, and the theft of wounds from the truly wounded. He is not even fat.

He is a writer who does not find an opportunity to be angry; when the month’s outrage begins, he does not have a side, he does not belong to any group of people with dissimilar noses. The guy is doomed.

How everyone became a victim is the same story as how everyone became a narcissist. The most naïve of them all was Narcissus, who only fell in love with his own reflection; many after him saw, and see, their own image in the reflections of others. This is at the heart of the most powerful, and probably corrupt, aspect of storytelling—the moment when the reader “relates” to a character. For centuries, storytellers who could create familiar characters succeeded more than those who were more interested in the abstract fringe. But now the storyteller is not required. People seek a reminder of themselves not merely in stories, but in almost everything. A fierce democracy is taking over the idea of celebrity—everyone is photographed, everyone is called beautiful and a genius. And, as they do in the star signs, they see a special tribute about themselves in the hysteria of a collective wound.

Today there is something triumphant about having a problem. There were a few reminders in July. An American woman mailed her team: “I’m taking today and tomorrow to focus on my mental health. Hopefully I’ll be back next week refreshed and back to 100%.” This could have been a joke many of us have sent to our colleagues, but her boss knew it was not because she had sent similar mails before. He mailed her with compliments for using sick days for mental health. He was not joking either. “I can’t believe this is not standard practice at all organizations,” he said. The exchange received one of the highest rewards of our modern times—it went viral. It caught the attention of Facebook’s chief operating officer, Sheryl Sandberg, who, in a post, praised the boss for his “compassion”. She herself is attempting to create an organization where people are not penalized for emotional upheavals.

The new age is trying to eradicate notions of weaknesses, of flaws, and to persuade the world to expand the idea of human normality.

But some among the clinically depressed may have been irritated, as they were when actor Deepika Padukone suddenly became their ambassador. A few I spoke to then refused to believe that she was one of them, that she was truly depressed. It was as though they owned a turf of serious dejection and a person with vulgar joys was encroaching. Their discomfort lies in people confusing transient sorrow with depression.

If everyone begins to claim they are depressed, without fully understanding what it means, what becomes of those who are to a severe degree? There is a line, they seem to suggest, between personality and mental health. Some people should be asked to go seek meaning or swim or run; some people should be prescribed drugs. But all of them claim to be depressed today. All of them will, as capitalism tries to save itself from an unhappy workforce, ask for days off “to focus” on their mental health. And bosses will be expected to compliment them for being forthright.

When people claim they have a problem, it is not acceptable any more to tell them that millions face such issues without a whimper, or to ask them to work hard to overcome it, or to face it with greater fortitude. The remarkable quality of the modern problem is not any more that it is a stigma, but that it has become sacred.

This month there was an online campaign which demanded that the first day of the menstrual cycle qualify for leave. It swiftly became popular. Any woman who refused to accept that periods were that serious a matter was condemned.

Men are an enthusiastic part of public laments, but issues that are male-specific are rare. They do keep getting requests from delicate new-age men to cry more. There must be something great about crying that some savants know, it is their chief solution for improving men. “If all men were suddenly ok with crying, 70% of our problems would disappear,” tweeted the comedian and actor Kumail Nanjiani. It is not clear if he meant men should cry privately or on the shoulders of their women (greatly annoying them, surely, if done too often), or should they cry in the malls?

The modern tendency to glorify problems has some obvious consequences. The rich will always be louder than the rest, and the finite empathy of a society is then wasted in self-absorbed privileged lament rather than being spent in concern for the truly unfortunate.

The festive communal commotion of “we-have-problems” reminds me of the Chennai of my childhood when there would be this funeral procession and all the onlookers, including the town alcoholics, would crash the concourse, dancing and whistling, and the actual grim mourners would disappear in the mobs.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit Happiness Of Other People.

The writer tweets at @manujosephsan





The misanthropic diet


2017-08-05

The most popular ideas that drive the world assume that humans, when taken together, are nice people. That we, for instance, want everyone to be equal. That when we stand in line and vote, only good can come out of our collective wish (this view is still respectable in Britain and the US). But there are some important ideas that have contempt for man.

Three years ago, the Union government issued advertisements asking Parsi men not to use condoms, presumably during sex. The Parsis, who are rich and literate, are endangered, and India was concerned. But India has been trying to control the population of the rest of the nation. The idea of population control is couched in humanitarian terms but it really is a campaign to limit the children of the poor. Population control is a people-hating, or a misanthropic, idea.

I promise that this piece is about eating.

Just that it is naive to assume that eating begins with food. It does not even end with food. In fact, very little about eating is about food, just as very little about religion is about god.

Apart from population control, there are other ideas that are noble yet misanthropic. They may not hate people but they think poorly of them. Almost the entire law enforcement system, and capitalism, for instance. Lovers of nature view humans as the central problem. And there are people who propagate the idea that having children is immoral.

There is another kind of misanthrope. They do not have a bitter view of humans at all. As the American poet Charles Bukowski said, he does not hate people, “I just feel better when they’re not around.” The happy misanthropes assume intelligence, by its very nature, is rare, hence a minority condition. As a result, they are suspicious of collective human behaviour. “Whenever you find yourself on the side of the majority, it is time to pause and reflect.” There are many quotes that are attributed to the writer Mark Twain that he never said, but this he did.

It does not mean that if the happy misanthropes see a crowd fleeing an unseen danger, they would run in the opposite direction. At times the crowd is wise, but most of the time collective behaviour can be used to glean what not to do. From this a very healthy personal diet may emerge.

Most people in the world are addicted to refined grain, which is sugar for all practical purposes, and to a specific form of sugar, which is widely known as sugar. The addiction has powerful delivery systems. Mamma, family tradition, community tradition, love and friends are all delivery systems of grain and sugar. Like the destined baby infects men and women with delirious love, grain and sugar delude people into thinking they are familial or traditional or religious.

As the happy misanthropes reject the ways of the majority and are able to stand outside the huddles of society, they have a better chance than others of liberating themselves from grain and sugar. Abstinence from refined carbohydrates is also a renunciation of our agrarian heritage, the very origin of our modern history, religions and politics, when nomadic tribals were colonized by plants and transformed into settlers. The happy misanthrope would not see any glory in being a nomad, he might even be suspicious of the term “hunter-gatherer” as those two words are now a foreboding of so much bull, but he sees wisdom in renouncing what most people hold so dear.

A misanthrope is often misunderstood as a misogynist or a racist, when perceived through narrow grouses. It is possible that most people who are considered disciplined ascetic workers or eaters are, too, in reality only misanthropes.

Beyond the cues from the majority, the misanthropes are also equipped to listen carefully to their own bodies without being distracted by popular wisdom or according too much respect to the many “findings” of “science”. The diet that emerges from this attitude is very clearly one that is devoid of grain or artificial sugars, and contains lots of banal boiled vegetables and moderate sources of protein and fat. It may not be perfect as there might be no such thing as a perfect diet, but this would resemble the highly regarded Zone diet and the Paleo diet, and other healthy low-carb diets.

There are things that repulse most people but would enchant happy misanthropes. For example, the death of food, at least food as we know it. This will never happen unless there is a calamity, but work is under way to make new kinds of food for those who want to eradicate the whole business of foraging, cooking and then enduring a meal. The most popular among such food is the American tech industry’s creation Soylent, which is a no-nonsense drink that contains most of the minerals and nutrition the body needs. Many people hate Soylent. Often they say they hate it for its taste. It is, of course, not tasty but what they truly hate is how the drink tries to substitute what is sacred. Soylent substitutes not just food, but also replaces the recreation of everything associated with food. Soylent does away with people, culture and collaboration.

Many millionaire and billionaire misanthropes in the Silicon Valley are known to have replaced at least one daily meal with similar drinks or vegetable shakes. Many follow intermittent fasting that eliminates eating for most of the day, or for whole weekends.

The misanthrope does not have to entirely abstain from the junk of grain and sugar. In fact, the true fun of grain and sugar is known only to those who rarely consume it. After renunciation, on a binge day when you eat Malabar parotta, you realize that there is a sort of pleasure in a narcotic substance that the drug’s addicts will never know.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit Happiness Of Other People.

He tweets at @manujosephsan





What I think when I think in English


2017-08-12

I used to hope in English, but all my other thoughts were in Tamil and Malayalam. I was born in Kerala and raised in Chennai, a cuckoo among the crows. I did not have a faculty for languages and could speak only one dominant tongue at a time. I spoke fluent Tamil and a type of Malayalam that would make Malayalees feel dejected. I wish I had told them that I could think beautifully in Malayalam.

The way I remember my life then, my purest thoughts were in my mother tongue. When I would resolve that I would one day lead my mother to great consistent happiness, it was in Malayalam. But when I would imagine Miss SM standing in her balcony combing her hair and I, in all whites and white shoes (black heels) running in slow motion, my hair bouncing, and when I would ask the universe silently the distraught question, are girls capable of love at all, it was in Tamil.

However, by the age of 17, I was moving away from Tamil and Malayalam, and beginning to think entirely in English. Are there serious consequences when this happens or is the special-ness of language overrated?

When I was around 10, during a monthly test in school, I was asked to write the gender that would be the opposite of “Ram”. I was baffled when I realized that most of the class had got the alleged answer “Ewe”. My answer was Sita. I still maintain that I was right. No one in Chennai had ever seen a ram, at least in the tropical city, while Ram, or Rama as we used to call him, was deep culture. Everything else about English was like this—it was venerable at a distance but all wrong when it passed through me. It was a medium of study and intellect but to use it in a casual conversation seemed comically arrogant. The act of speaking in English, in fact, was defamed as “Putting Peter” in my circle. I was among the boys who carried out the defamation. My teachers were not fluent in English. When my parents spoke English, they, like all Malayalees, spoke English in Malayalam. The effect of not being colonized by English was that I was an insider in my home town. I belonged to my city and the great beautiful city belonged to me. Not for a moment was I an amateur Indian. I could talk to thugs and policemen and slum-dwellers and eunuchs.

Being Tamil, or being Malayalee, was a distinct behavioural system and only those who thought in either of those languages could play a part in it. For instance, when some Tamilian Brahmin would want to convey an insult, he would hedge the risk by putting it across as an ambiguous joke. Also, Tamilians of my childhood had the propensity to use glee to show contempt. They would laugh hard, in an exaggerated way, at the jokes of the people they despised, especially their teachers or bosses.

All this I did not observe as a boy, when I used to think in Tamil. Observation is not the act of seeing; it is the act of perceiving what has already been seen. Only when I stopped thinking in Tamil did I begin to see Chennai more clearly and deeply. The Argentine writer Jorge Luis Borges once observed that you wouldn’t find the word “camel” in the Quran—the ancient Arabs had no reason to mention what was very common in almost every frame of their existence. Borges, it turned out, was wrong. Camels do find mention in the holy book, but the rarity of their appearance may still substantiate his larger point—that the camels were, for an Arab, “a part of reality, and he had no reason to single them out, while the first thing a forger, a tourist, or an Arab nationalist would do is bring on the camels”.

When I was growing up in Chennai, I was not proud of the city, or my home state Kerala. Maybe those days we were not seriously required to be proud of home. Love was enough. In fact, I made no special effort to learn to read and write in Tamil or Malayalam. I used them only to think and speak. I could write only in English and Hindi, both foreign to me, Hindi more than English. Then, in 1987, a film called Nayakan by Mani Ratnam was released. I was 13 and I thought it was the greatest film on earth. I still believe it is one of the greatest in world cinema. I decided that apart from being a journalist, I would also become a Tamil film-maker. I began to write many stories, all in English.

When I was 16, I thought the best way to enter the movie business was as a low-level actor. So when I heard that a film audition was under way for some extras, I went. The queue was long and the men looked impoverished and depressing, and the line had not moved after 2 hours, so I left, abandoning the idea of acting. I wrote more stories. I even co-wrote one with the milkman. Nothing ever came out of them. The Tamil sphere of creativity offered me no prospects. For me, there were no rewards for thinking in Tamil.

Meanwhile, my reading, in English, intensified. I was consumed by P.G. Wodehouse, Salman Rushdie, Carl Sagan, Stephen Hawking and Ayn Rand. I would not go beyond the first one-third of Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid by Douglas Hofstadter, but I was astonished. I did not know this level of intellect was even possible. Also, I was yet another adolescent in search of a bright future and only English promised me that in the line of work I had chosen. When I entered college to study English literature, my English diction was bad, and I had to train myself to speak only in English to improve. I did not ask myself then in what language I conducted my thoughts. But slowly, without my being aware of it, I was colonized by the English language.

I am now stranded in English. Most days I have to consciously fight its underrated influences. Unlike Indian languages, English has names for so many abstract things, including lies, that they can be misunderstood as truths, like socialism, hypnosis, sexism, liberty, human rights and plain nonsense like “quality time” and “multitasking”.

As a writer, especially as a novelist, even though I wish to write only in English, I derive all my ways of seeing from my experiences as a vernacular person. Forget subtlety. I belong to a melodramatic nation and I do not accept subtlety as a higher form of expression. And while I have accumulated a reasonably wide vocabulary as a reader, I use a very limited range of words in my thoughts, and that is what I believe I have a right to transmit to my novels. I would feel fake if I used some words—for instance, salubrious, meadows and brook. Maybe I am always trying only to write a good Tamil film in English. And while at it, I do believe that I can now see more than the insiders; I am like the outsider who is able to see the camel.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit Happiness Of Other People.

He tweets at @manujosephsan





Activism as a ‘Blue Whale Challenge’


2017-08-26

We are told that there is a game called the Blue Whale Challenge, that it originated in Russia and has now spread to many nations; that the game has infected an unknown number of teenagers who play by joining chat rooms on the internet and accepting assignments from the shadowy curators of the groups; that each player is given 50 tasks, most of which involve self-harm; and that the final task is suicide. We are told that the Blue Whale Challenge is responsible for hundreds of suicides, including many in India in the past few days alone. This is in line with the argument that the reason for suicide resides outside the person who has committed suicide.

We have been told that poverty pushes farmers to kill themselves; eviction from a college makes a Dalit kill himself; and that stress kills Indian students. These are false and dangerous ideas.

“Suicide is complex. There are almost always multiple causes, including psychiatric illnesses, that may not have been recognized or treated,” says a cautionary note that was prepared in 2015 by a group of organizations from many nations, including the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention and the National Institute of Mental Health. The note states, “Mental disorders and/or substance abuse have been found in 90% of people who have died by suicide.” The note, “The Recommendations For Reporting On Suicide”, which derives its moral confidence from dozens of studies and reflects the conclusions of thousands of research papers, is a directive to journalists. “Avoid reporting that death by suicide was preceded by a single event, such as a recent job loss, divorce or bad grades. Reporting like this leaves the public with an overly simplistic and misleading understanding of suicide,” the note says, adding without any ambiguity, “Report on suicide as a public health issue.” It discourages “describing recent suicides as an ‘epidemic,’ ‘skyrocketing’, or other strong terms”.

Almost every suicide is inherently a mental health story. The social or economic causes, including those mentioned in that most unreliable yet overrated of documents—the suicide note—might be triggers, but they are triggers only in a particular type of people. Suicide is, even when committed by a poor Indian farmer or a dejected Dalit boy or an urban teenager, primarily a psychiatric matter. But there is a whole confederation of ideologues who promote the idea that suicides are crimes perpetrated by people whom the ideologues despise.

Last year, after Dalit scholar and activist Rohith Vemula hanged himself, his friends and other activists cast the suicide as the result of harassment by an upper-caste cartel that ran the university, which had evicted him for his political activities. Soon, this view was reflected by the entire liberal establishment and by the mainstream media.

Vemula was a highly vocal activist. If his death was a result of mental torture, he would have made much of it in his suicide note. He did leave an anguished note, but absolved everyone of responsibility. Activists, however, insisted that his death had nothing to do with mental issues, which Vemula himself had alluded to in his note: “I feel a growing gap between my soul and my body.”

It was as though a Dalit was not allowed to be depressed. In his final letter, he had said, “The value of a man was reduced to his immediate identity….” It appeared that even his death was reduced to just that.

What if the hysteria of political activism around his death hid the actual circumstances of his death? What if he was dejected not only by the upper-caste cartel but, as he hints in his suicide note, also by the very people he belonged to? What if the perpetual negativity of activism worsened his depression? What if his doom began with his decision to abandon microbiology, despite his dream of becoming a science writer, and taking up sociology just because he was interested in society? What if he had received better advice, what if someone had cared enough to tell him that the humanities are luxury streams in which the rich and the suave do better than the poor? What if the very mourners were the actual triggers of his death? What if a complex suicide was reduced to a simple cause of a simple effect? And what if thousands of depressed Dalit students were taking cues from the melodramatic media coverage of his death and seeking heroic ends to their miseries? This is precisely why “The Recommendations For Reporting On Suicide” nudges journalists to be more scientific than political or emotional while reporting suicides.

The most successful myth of activism, though, is the idea of “farmer suicides”, the simplistic notion that poverty and debt drive farmers to kill themselves. This is a very important and passionate view of many rural activists because the hypothesis of farmer suicides shames urban capitalism, and can be used selectively to condemn any political party.

There can be no dispute that most Indians in the agrarian economy are in perpetual economic despair but the presumption that they would kill themselves without being guided by a powerful psychiatric state is plain ludicrous. Apart from the opinion of psychiatrists, and the empirical results of numerous studies, there are many pieces of statistics that seriously question the popular idea of farmer suicide. According to National Crime Records Bureau figures for 2015, the suicide rate of “farmers and agricultural workers”, at 4.5 per 100,000, is way below the national average of 10.6. This has been the story over the past 15 years, a period when activists and the media successfully branded “farmer suicide” as a special form of suicide.

In fact, the Indian farmer is less likely to commit suicide compared to more affluent groups in India and other parts of the world. Also, the number of male farmers who commit suicide is many times higher than female farmers. This skewed ratio is similar to a pattern observed in many countries for suicides. In many regions, men who complete suicide outnumber women. The fact that Indian farmers, too, exhibit this trend appears to suggest that unique Indian triggers may be subordinate to more fundamental universal reasons for why people kill themselves.

A consequence of the myth of “farmer suicide” is that politicians are disbursing aid to farmers. The altruism of simpletons is not useless but it usually does not solve anything. What India’s vast but shrinking agrarian society needs is a serious and urgent mental healthcare system. But then when a lie is popular, and sacred, when a wrong diagnosis is made by the elite for ideological reasons, the solutions are farcical. And, it is possible that thousands of farmers, who were depressed, who were on the brink, were inspired to kill themselves because activists and the news media created conditions that were conducive for the Werther effect, or Copycat Suicides, a phenomenon in which people who are suicidal construe highly publicized or glorified suicides as endorsement of the act.

In the Blue Whale Challenge, there is one person in the chat room who is not expected to kill himself—the curator. Among the suicide squads of terror groups, too, the handler is the one who does not die. People who misrepresent a suicide as a political tragedy instead of what it is in its core—a psychiatric action—are not very different from those handlers who persuade the weak to die while staying alive to recruit more to die for a cause.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit Happiness Of Other People.

He tweets at @manujosephsan





Is storytelling only a cunning trick?


2017-09-08

One day I went to meet a mind reader. He could read that I did not believe anyone could read minds but the young Israeli, Lior Suchard, was known across the world for his paranormal powers. In 2011, former US president Bill Clinton was in the audience and Suchard asked Clinton to think of a two-digit number, which Suchard then guessed correctly as “61”, which has to be the most useless thought to extract from Clinton. But Suchard is often very impressive. In fact, Clinton, he said, wanted him to be deployed against Iran to steal the thoughts of Iranians.

When I first saw Suchard, in 2013, he was conducting a “corporate workshop” in Gurugram. Many of the participants were managers from Nokia, which had paid over Rs16,000 per mind to listen to Suchard. It is not a price a corporation would pay its executives to attend a magic show in the middle of a weekday but then the story Suchard had spun around himself was that he had mental powers that most people did not possess. He could also bend spoons with his mind, he said (so can I, as several little children would attest).

I asked Suchard, “What is the most important thing you know about people?”

“They want to believe,” he said.

Everybody tells stories. Only some who do are called storytellers. In fact, the people who are paid the most for their stories are probably not known as storytellers at all, just as the most successful magicians are not known as magicians. All famous people are famous stories themselves. Apart from religion, culture and diets, most products and product lines, and many industries too, are largely creations of stories. There are origin stories of billionaires—that exact but fictitious moment when an insight struck; there are totally false stories; half-truth stories; white-lie stories; and cute stories about the flaws of brilliant people.

There is a common perception that stories are tricks, or they contain tricks. Life is mostly banal, reality mostly boring, and because the only objective of a story is to be interesting, the world accepts that stories have to be somewhat charlatan to succeed. Not just advertisers and politicians, but others, like businessmen, psychologists, popular scientists and activists, too feel it is important to trick, lie or exaggerate or not tell the whole truth to achieve an influential story. That white toothpaste makes teeth whiter; that fat is worse than sugar; that there is such a thing as a black hole; that machines will take over the world, are all very successful stories of modern times that exploit powerful human emotions or ignorance.

This form of storytelling shares its principles with the timeless rules of telling a pulp fiction or a commercially viable story, chiefly these: “Give people want they want”; “Promote popular beliefs and never challenge them”; and “Know your audience so that you can pander to them”.

But there is an entirely different form of storytelling, a very difficult kind of craft. It is what is widely known as literature or art. Nobody can define art but most people would agree that there is an exalted place for integrity in it. There is an expectation of the world that in literature the storyteller may fabricate a story while still saying only what he or she truly means to say. This may not always be true. Some literary novels, for instance, are not even stories in the first place: They are banality couched as anthropology. And they can be dishonest too. The novelist Marlon James said, soon after he won the Man Booker Prize in 2015, that authors of colour tend to “pander to white women” as the rewards for such pandering are immense. There might be some fake writers but there can be no doubt that integrity is sacred in artistic storytelling. Despite that, when taken at its peak, art is thrilling and transformative in a way pulp cannot match.

Can corporations and other major storytellers derive powerful techniques of storytelling from art?

Robert McKee, a popular American tutor of storytelling who also trains business executives to tell stories about their companies and brands, said in an interview to the Harvard Business Review that a story is, among other things, a set of answers to the questions the storyteller has set out to solve. “Finally,” he says, a good storyteller, “leans back from the design of events he or she has created and asks, ‘Do I believe this? Is it neither an exaggeration nor a soft-soaping of the struggle? Is this an honest telling, though heavens may fall?’”

Some of the most successful corporate stories today are much closer to the principles of artistic storytelling than to Dan Brown. The legend of Steve Jobs, for instance, is an account of his fierce independence and his war against majoritarian ideas. Many of his crucial characteristics as an entrepreneur were closer to those of an artist. His faith in his own instinct, for instance, and his contempt for market surveys. Jobs also showed that it is possible to have a high regard for the world—that people will appreciate an uncompromising work of art—and still succeed. He also used the most unsung artistic talent—the power of conjecture. He did not seek opinions from the world because it does not always know what it wants. He demonstrated that the autocracy of artistic creators can conjure up an object that can sell in millions, and that the Apple way can coexist with the Samsung way of doing things, which worships the democracy of market surveys.

A few days ago, Russian President Vladimir Putin, in a talk to students in his country, said the nation that becomes the leader in Artificial Intelligence “will become the ruler of the world”. Tesla chief executive officer Elon Musk tweeted his response: “It begins”. Coming from Musk, this was an effective but deeply felt dramatic device as he tries hard to push his idea that the world should be wary of Artificial Intelligence, and about the stupidity of smart machines. Musk is a storyteller in the mould of Steve Jobs, who knows the power of a story but is unafraid of discarding artifice and telling his story the way he wants to.

To tell a powerful story, we need to believe in our own stories.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of the forthcoming Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous





An exclusive extract from Manu Joseph’s ‘Miss Laila, Armed and Dangerous’


2017-09-09

Mukundan is unable to guess the nature of the relationship between Jamal and the girl. He is yet to see an indisputable sign of love in the blue Indica, like kissing, or a hand reaching out to squeeze flesh or a man throttling a woman. But then the Indica has been travelling at over eighty kilometres an hour, and it has not stopped or slowed down since it left Mumbra. Some lovers are careful on the highway, perhaps.

He has tried to gather some information about the girl from his friends without revealing that he is shadowing her at the moment. They had the tone a lot of people in the Bureau have when they speak to him. They talk down; they are affectionate, but they talk down because he has always made it very clear he is not as smart as they are. It is not entirely a lie. There is something about speech he has not fully mastered. He has thoughts of reasonably good quality but they do not emerge as speech. It is as though he is always forced to speak in a foreign tongue. Even to him he often sounds intellectually austere, like when brown cricketers are forced to speak in English during post-match press conferences. But he does not mind his handicap, which probably does not have a name, hence not considered a handicap. When people speak to him, they lower their guard, say things, a lot of things.

The world is filled with people who wish to impress when they speak. It is not a bad idea at all but there are advantages in being underestimated. That, too, is the art of conversation.

No one seems to have any clue about the girl. Mukundan has no doubt that Jamal and the girl are very familiar with each other. The only thing he is not sure about is whether they have met without clothes. Jamal does not have a sister. Maybe she is a cousin, a niece, or an employee.

Illustration by Amruta Patil

If they are lovers, what is it that she sees in a man like Jamal, a married thirty-five-year-old man with kids who is stupid enough to be shadowed by the Bureau? What do women see in most men anyway? You look at girls laughing in the company of their men and you would think humour is a very common male talent, which it is not. Shouldn’t love be the reward for the clever alone? The rest must receive only loyalty, which is a very different thing. But the world does not work that way. But then, to imagine love as high tribute is to fall for the historical lie of lovers. Love is probably a lower emotion than its reputation. That thought always comforts him.

He is the sort of man who, if he ever gets entrapped in love, would turn out to be a good eternal husband. He knows that, and he fears his own captivity. At a level of living it is smart to be a good husband because it is smart to be good. He understands morals as a system of logic. In most situations there is usually only one right path and millions of wrong turns. And everyone, in a given era, in a given place, knows what is right. If you forget your time, if you forget your place, there will be trouble.

Maybe he is a bit naïve when it comes to women and sex. When his niece was born, after he saw her in the cradle, he could not masturbate for a whole week. Sex seemed like such a depraved act of violence. With the angelic face of his infant niece in his head, he even started having dreams about the general welfare of women. And in his waking hours attempted another poem. About a reporter with the Malayala Manorama, who has got the greatest journalistic scoop of the century. He has stumbled upon a stunning secret that is eventually headlined, ‘All Lost and Stolen Girls in the History of Humanity Revealed to Have Been Forced into Stenography’. The story has an extraordinary impact on society, especially fathers, who lose their fears. They release their girls from their hawkish vigil. Girls suddenly find the freedom to roam their towns, like boys, and they begin to thrive.

Mukundan has worked hard many nights on the poem, but the words just won’t come.

As it usually happens to a discreetly pursued car, the blue hatchback begins to assume bleak human qualities. It looks stupid, debased and tragic, its haste comical because it is only racing towards a carefully laid-out trap. A little blue car duped by the republic, a young intelligence officer on its tail. How did these fools get into this situation when life is actually somewhat beautiful, and easy too, no matter what writers say?

He has always found the shared tragedy of a couple heartbreaking. Something particularly sorrowful about the togetherness of man and woman in misfortune, even if they are not lovers. He would not want to look at their faces when their destruction begins, in a few hours.

He wonders why the Bureau has planned to capture Jamal this way. Why not just pluck him at home, or when he goes to the market. There would be too many witnesses? And, maybe they want to take him with his supplies, whatever it is that he is carrying in that bag or in the boot of the car. Also, Boss wants to know if he is going to pick up any interesting characters along the way. Apart from a young woman, that is. Men, dangerous men, that is what the Bureau is looking for.

He has always found the shared tragedy of a couple heartbreaking. Something particularly sorrowful about the togetherness of man and woman in misfortune, even if they are not lovers. He would not want to look at their faces when their destruction begins, in a few hours-

Mukundan hopes a miracle would occur, that the Indica would stop on the highway and the girl would get away. She is probably only getting a ride to a relative’s home, who lives in one of those gloomy grey buildings by the highway.



‘Miss Laila, Armed and Dangerous’ by Manu Joseph.

The phone rings in his shirt pocket. It is Boss. ‘Sir.’ ‘Is the girl still there?’ ‘Yes, sir.’

‘We have to extract her before we take the car.’


‘Sir.’


‘We have about five hours to do that, if they don’t stop anywhere. But we can’t have a situation where Jamal changes his plan.’

‘Sir.’


‘We just want the girl out of the car, that’s all. Nothing else should change. We want him to be on course, we want him to come to us. We’re waiting.’

‘Sir.’


‘But we don’t want the girl.’


‘Got it, sir.’


‘We extract the girl without Jamal changing his plan.’


‘Sir.’


‘If you have a plan let me know. Don’t intervene until then. If things change, call.’

‘Sir.’

‘The thing is, Jamal might collect more people along the way. We are interested in those people.’

‘Jamal threw his luggage in the backseat, sir.’


‘So?’


‘He is not expecting anyone in the backseat, sir. Or maybe there are a lot of things in the boot, sir.’


‘Let’s wait for a while, let’s see if any men board. And then take a call.’

‘Sir.’

‘I’ll be in touch.’


‘Sir.’


‘We have to extract that girl.’

Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous will be released by HarperCollins India on 18 September.





Why we should not be ashamed of our contradictions


2017-09-23

A benign fraud in art and journalism is contrast photography, the kind where the contrast is not a property of light, but of India. Burqa-clad women walking beside girls in short skirts; the sari-draped scientists of the space programme; a naked urchin at the giant glass window of an upscale restaurant; the homeless beneath a builder’s hoarding; a Bharatanatyam dancer holding a laptop. A meaningful question that we can ask the creators of such frames is: “So?”

Five years from now there will certainly be an addition to the contrast series: a malnourished farmer standing in the foreground as, in the backdrop, India’s first bullet train charges over an elevated rail. Already, cartoonists have lampooned the collision of the idea of the high-speed train and the reality of India. One featured larger crowds travelling on the roof of the bullet train, and in another, which is more probable, a man is taking a dump as the train approaches.

There is an unspoken opinion in the contrast images—that something is odd in the scene, that something is wrong; and in the case of the bullet-train image of 2022, that the poor man is the victim of the train, that it is vulgar for a nation to possess an expensive rail system (even though it is mostly financed by Japan at almost no interest) when many Indians have nothing to eat. At the sight of such contradictions, a class of Indians are trained to feel guilty. But it is time to accept that it is within the limits of decency not to be ashamed anymore of India’s contrasts, that the contradictions are, of course, vulgar, but then they are an honest and fundamental visual quality of a middle-income nation trying to make something of itself. There are times and places when the vulgarity of modern India is actually a good omen.

The lament against any infrastructural shine is an old habit of urban Indian conscience. It may have made some sense in an age when public spending was always zero-sum, but not anymore. The fact is that the bullet train does not steal the resources of slower trains. And swanky airports are in no way responsible for shanty railway stations. But among a section of the population, the instinct to curse the masquerades of wealth is very deep. Last year, the Indian Premier League, too, came under severe attack for hosting matches in parched Maharashtra. The complaint was that because a cricket ground needed thousands of litres of water, cricket matches loot the meagre water resource of drought-hit regions. But the fact is that it is on the day of a cricket match that a cricket ground is not heavily watered. On most other days it is. So the decision people have to make is whether they want a cricket ground, not whether they can afford to host a cricket match. Also, the amount of water that is needed to water an Indian cricket ground, which is between 15,000-20,000 litres, is the same as the amount of fresh water needed to make one kilogram of chocolate, according to a global network called the Institution of Mechanical Engineers. Yet, a cricket match would look more vulgar in the harsh summer of Vidarbha than a concerned citizen in the region eating chocolate to alleviate her rage at cruel capitalists.

But then are facts really more important than perception?

Many years ago, my employer lodged me in a chawl (a cheap tenement of one-room homes), in Mumbai, but I objected to living in a place where there were only common toilets shared by all residents. So the employer, who was also the landlord of the chawl, decided to extend my room and build a toilet. The property documents suggested that the landlord had legal rights to build a toilet in my room, but not in any other home. The residents did not mind, except one man who opposed the construction of the private toilet on the grounds that it was a luxury, which will make “the others feel very bad”. He successfully inspired the residents to block the plan.

In the larger scheme, too, logic, so often, is not so important or influential as general perception and public emotion. And a poor nation, especially, has to be very cautious and respectful of public sentiments. Grand symbols of progress, like giant cable-stayed bridges and beautiful buildings, can be dangerous for the politicians who build them. They can also create disharmony in society if people feel excluded by them. For instance, in the new disenchantment among Western Europe’s poor, such as in France and Belgium, we should not underestimate the role of the spectacular urban beauty of the great cities in the region.

Also, it would be wrong to assume that all the demonstrations of India’s stark extremes are pointless. The pioneering images of the contradictions are powerful. For instance, the 1966 photograph by Henri Cartier-Bresson of an Indian space scientist carrying a rocket’s nose cone on the back of his bicycle. The photograph means different things to different people. Many feel proud to be reminded how impoverished India was when the space programme began, and how valiant India’s vision was. I am among those who are reminded that rocket science is so much easier than poverty eradication. In fact, I propose that all writers replace the obsolete expression, “It’s not rocket science” with “It’s not poverty eradication”.

Rockets historically, and even today, erroneously convey the idea of progress. They are sexy in a way the war against malaria cannot be. This is possibly why despots love missiles. This is possibly why India, too, began its space programme—for quick, attainable pride. India was able to flog it as a welfare programme. As a result it did not infuriate the poor, but there are many other symbols of wealth or technology or modernity that do not go down well in a poor nation.

The professional doom of the actor Rajinikanth, too, is in the gentrification of his recent films. Chandrababu Naidu, the chief minister of Andhra Pradesh, at the turn of the millennium, was always seen with his laptop, but after major electoral setbacks, he was almost never seen in public with the laptop again.

The image of a bullet train, especially of the train juxtaposed with malnourished Indians, will not be popular. Yet, the economic service of the vulgar high-speed train would be immeasurably larger than the street altruism of the good folk.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed and Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan





Why happiness is the wrong goal


2017-10-07

Many years ago, spiritual leader Sri Sri Ravi Shankar pointed to me to tell his disciples how not to be. “Some people never smile,” he said as I left the room moments after our conversation ended. The interview had not gone well. He had expected me to be seated on the floor like his millionaire disciples and the journalists before me, as he sat on a throne. But I had dragged a chair, and sat on it. He announced, once I had left the room, that I must be an unhappy person. I heard his disciples burst out laughing because even though they probably came to him to cure sorrow, the accusation of innate unhappiness in a foe was the ultimate insult.

In many other rooms of the world, unhappiness is perceived as a character flaw. Happiness is widely accepted as the central goal of life. It is, in fact, accepted as the only universal goal. All other respectable pursuits are so only because they are said to lead to happiness. Even sugar finds legitimacy in the civilized world because it is associated with happiness. The pursuit of happiness is, in fact, a stated fundamental American right. But can happiness ever be a pursuit, really? Especially when we are not sure what it means?

We have been trying to get a grip on the meaning of happiness for centuries. All our fables and all our religions tell us that we have to be moral to attain it. As children, our first foreboding of the seriousness of life is that happiness is the very opposite of fun.

We are not clear about what happiness is but the wisest among us claim it is distinct from pleasure. We defame pleasure.

“Pleasure is short-term, addictive and selfish. It’s taken, not given. It works on dopamine. Happiness is long-term, additive and generous. It’s giving, not taking. It works on serotonin,” wrote the American marketer Seth Godin in his blog recently. As people say when they fear they are being semantic, he added, “This is not merely simple semantics.”

He went on to say that pleasure and happiness may appear to be the same thing but they are very different. “Marketers usually sell pleasure,” he wrote, but he did not arrive at the meaning of happiness, except that it is something more valuable, and comes at the very end.NextMAds

Yet, for most people, happiness is nothing but a chain of frequent instances of pleasure. If there is no pleasure at frequent intervals, including the rush derived from eating junk or ingesting easy entertainment, they become unhappy. But for some, Godin’s description of happiness, even though it is from a man who is groping in the dark like many of us, is very familiar and convincing. Both types of people, the ones who think pleasure is happiness, and the unhappy deep thinkers who invent meanings of joy, face the same problem in the practical world. The very things that make us happy cease to do so if they persist. A stable happy life soon becomes a rot and we begin to long for change. Every now and then, happy people itch to do something rash to escape the rot of happiness.

The fact is we tire of happiness. We know in our hearts that there is something more. It is not the ultimate pursuit that the modern age has made it out to be. “Happiness without meaning characterizes a relatively shallow, self-absorbed or even selfish life, in which things go well, needs and desire are easily satisfied, and difficult or taxing entanglements are avoided,” wrote the Austrian psychiatrist Viktor Frankl. “Being human always points, and is directed, to something or someone, other than oneself—be it a meaning to fulfil or another human being to encounter. The more one forgets himself—by giving himself to a cause to serve or another person to love—the more human he is.”

This search for meaning, too, is couched as a form of happiness. That is just poor language. And we should not underestimate the role of language in creating philosophical confusion.thirdMAds

Take our pursuit of meaning, for instance. We are trained to believe that we have to “discover” it, we have to “find” it; that it exists somewhere, and some men, chiefly men, have found it. At least one man sat under a tree and found it. What if, in reality, meaning is something we have to invent, rather than discover? What if life is inherently meaningless and we have to fabricate some grand intellectual or philosophical pursuit to save us from the soul-crunching boredom of life? And what if the pursuit of meaning, like many other pursuits, depends neither on dopamine nor on serotonin?

What if the truth is that our search for meaning, knowledge and companionship is not supposed to make us happy at all, yet it is important for us to pursue them? What if our instinct to perform our duties, or even amass wealth, is not supposed to lead us to happiness, but is a requirement of our primal instincts? What if the confusion and disenchantment of modern life is because our pursuits do not lead to happiness, and we are trained to presume it is because of a fault in us?

Once we take happiness out of the natural order of every pursuit, we can be kinder to ourselves for the way we are and what we do. We can then let our madness flow instead of trying to tame it when it does not lead to pleasure or joy. We can accept ambition as a capacity for unhappiness and go through life without feeling like charlatans just because we wish to achieve material things. We can perform our parental duties instead of overrating men who abandoned their families and sought refuge in the Himalayas. fourthMAds

In diminishing the hold of happiness over us, we need not develop a contempt for it. We see in the arts and the humanities the elevation of misery as the highest form of seriousness. But perhaps we should have respect for happiness, otherwise we will lose our sources of happiness, including the people who love us. It is only when we do not have happiness that we know exactly what it is.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

The writer tweets at @manujosephsan





The ethical traveller’s guide to enjoying capitalism


2017-10-21

Unlike humans, the albatross is monogamous. Most birds are, but the albatross especially does not stray unless there is a crisis. Hence, the albatross chick has an additional parent—the faithful father. This is one of the reasons why the great bird has thrived in time. Morality, in albatrosses, as in humans, is primarily only a good idea. But what is good for evolution might be oppressive in a lifespan. High environmental sensitivity, for instance. How must we escape the hard logic of the right thing?

In February, Condé Nast Traveller sent me to Antarctica. I flew to the southern tip of Argentina, from where I boarded a cruise liner that sailed for two days through a beautiful storm. Finally, here was a cataclysm an Indian from the Coromandel Coast could enjoy without guilt because no homeless people were going to die in it. Maybe we should not have so much respect for social guilt that we suffer it on the way to Antarctica, but it was the sort of ship and the sort of journey that constantly relayed to the voyagers that the natural residue of happiness is guilt. The dominant virtue on the boat was environmentalism. We were, after all, going to the sanctum sanctorum of nature where a precarious balance, apparently, held off apocalypse. In those circumstances, to be human was to be a delinquent.

In some passengers, their environmental ethics was like a glorious wound, an open wound they flaunted, like the flaming heart of Jesus Christ. Quark Expeditions’ leadership was reassuringly tyrannical about the environment. The vessel did not expel any waste into the Antarctic waters. When we reached Antarctica, a vast roll of midget mountains lying beneath hundreds of metres of ancient and primordial snow, our sophisticated handlers sterilized our boots before we boarded the inflatable boats that would take us to the mainland. The fact that most of the ship’s white-collar staff were marine biologists somehow seemed respectful of nature. They did not permit us to leave anything behind on land, not even urine, nor bring any rock back with us. They instructed us not to cross the cordons that marked the colonies of the penguins, or to speak to the birds, or touch them. To fly a drone over Antarctica, you need to get a permit before you set out on the voyage. Also, we were not called tourists, who are foes of nature. We were “explorers”. Our vacation was not a vacation, but an “expedition”.

On the ship, if you said, in a careless moment, that you did not believe in climate change, someone might have thrown you overboard. There was a young American tourist who, every day of our expedition into Antarctica, kept a watch for unrefined people who would wander beyond a cordon into the penguin colony, or step on an ancient fossil. And he would scream, “Watch it.” An ignorant fur seal, unaware of his goodness, chased him on a beach one evening. He looked very embarrassed as though he himself had violated nature.

There were many others on the ship who had become fierce guardians of the world. One night, some explorers led by an endearing mountaineer called Mandip Singh Soin gathered in a room and took an oath on a bottle of Antarctic water that they would save the continent from other humans.

This was a place where people thought poorly of those who belched smoke from a smokestack. Yet, that is exactly what the giant ship did. Scores of similar “expeditions” every year expelled thousands of explorers into the fragile wild of Antarctica. Almost every day in the summers they came in polluting ships; surrounded seals and whales and shot pictures; laughed in a manner that made the birds leave their perches. Then they went back to the ships and listened to their scholarly handlers who gave PowerPoint presentations in the auditorium that demonstrated the threat humans posed to Antarctica. As in the outside world, everybody on the ship articulated a moral objective so that they could justify an amoral act.

It was appropriate that the ship should belch smoke from the smokestack, because the boat, like any other giant chimney, was a creation of capitalism. Every passenger had spent at least half a million rupees to be there; many had spent much more. They were aware of it. Their high-strung activist reactions were, in fact, compensation for being material consumers. The ship’s guides, who were great lovers of Antarctica’s wildlife but whose high income depended on the mild pollution of the continent, never slacked while making tourists conform to every little rule.

Those who did not overreact to Antarctica were the victims of capitalism, or those who lived on its fringes, people who had somehow gathered enough money to go on a pilgrimage to nature’s holiest place. A rickshaw-puller from New York saw in the purity of Antarctica the greatness of the universe and the smallness of wealth and success, which he did not possess. A young nomadic couple saw in the extraterrestrial quality of Antarctica the confirmation that they had not wasted their best years doing nothing.

But most of the others, the consumers, the bankers and merchants and people who had thrived on capitalism, wondered how to be ethical travellers in a delicate place and still enjoy the capitalism of high-end travel.

One night on the ship, a poet and her friends were chatting, and as they considered the bleak future of Antarctica, they decried capitalism. But then it occurred to them that there is something very wrong with complaining about capitalism while sitting in a luxury cruise liner. They began to whip themselves in the familiar ways of those who are rich and conscientious at once. They termed their materialism “a contradiction”, which is a word for hypocrisy in nice people. But then is hypocrisy really such a big sin? Especially in those who do not earn their income or respect from self-righteousness? In most of us who have never claimed to be more noble than the others, isn’t hypocrisy actually a fundamental right? We want to save Antarctica and we wish to go there in a steamship. It’s all right. Like a bit of junk food and practicality. It’s all right. In some circumstances, even the albatross strays.

The ethical traveller, once in Antarctica, may find an attitude very useful in minimizing damage to nature. It is an attitude that might be useful in all beautiful places, actually in any place where one stands and stares—the quiet acceptance that it is not all about us. The world and the universe do not exist for us, certainly not to make us happy; we do not need to take so many amateur pictures of elephant seals from so close; and we do not have to laugh aloud or convey thoughts or create other forms of noise in the presence of natural silence, which has its own vital fragility. Besotted with nature’s most sacred places, the capitalist need not abstain, but could consider the second best form of conservation—austerity.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed and Dangerous.





Is objectivity actually a disorder?


2017-10-28

When people say “be objective”, they usually mean, “agree with me”. But the world does know the meaning of objectivity. It is, in fact, a moral goal, an expectation that society has from its most learned, most of whom think they are highly objective. But there are only a few who actually walk the middle path, which is a desolate road, and they are not there because they are enlightened. They are there because they cannot help it, they are made that way, they are afflicted with disbelief. Objective people are a personality-type.

How might our age look to those who ail from innate objectivity? They are probably like the lonely who gape at the festive commotion of other people who so easily fit in; they see groups making circular formations in cosy parties and holding uniform views about diverse subjects, including organic vegetables, farmers, giant corporations, the equal distribution of wealth, free markets, dangerous Muslims, sweet Muslims, hydrocarbons or polar ice caps. The middle-path dwellers may often wonder who is stranger: the rich who claim to be Marxists, or the broke youth who claim to be capitalists.

Can people ever be the labels they give themselves? Can it be that socialism and capitalism, like many other powerful ideas that have names, are only thought experiments of dead eccentrics that the world has taken too literally? The economist Amartya Sen told me in an interview, about four years ago: “I don’t know what socialism means any more, I don’t know what capitalism means. It is a complete waste of time to discuss socialism and capitalism. Every successful economy in the world will be a mixture of both. It is a question of balance you are looking for. If it is the tipping point you’re looking for, it would be the tipping point of terminology.”

But in choosing where they belong, individuals do not depend on how well an idea works in practice. They need to only ask how well it works in theory.

There are immense social and professional advantages in belonging to an ideological or intellectual camp. People make useful friends, they have delightful conversations. They look around at their large tribes and their biases find corroboration. They find clear political and economic directions. They begin to answer the important question—about who they really are—and the answer is collective and glorious.

Take, for example, India’s social elite who migrated to the US and immediately became, in situations, the underclass, finding comfort in an exaggerated love for their homeland. Or India’s sophisticated gentry, including the Nehruvian old money, who have been eclipsed by new money, who have lost their easy privileges and whose wealth has been devalued by the higher threshold for the very definition of rich, who have sought refuge in the moral guardianship of the poor and the weak. All defeats and humiliations are today subsumed in collective biases.

A person afflicted with objectivity, on the other hand, has no relief. Not for him the comfort of belonging to a group of people who can agree on comforting lies. His arguments against the narratives of his tribe are increasingly annoying to the other members and in time he is isolated. The others on the middle path who know how to keep their mouth shut are no less lonely. Also, in many important walks of life, the middle path is, by its very nature, dull. The most popular journalists and novelists and comedians, for instance, are those who have picked a side.

Many who are on the middle path are, not surprisingly, misanthropes. As this column has argued before, the modern misanthrope is not essentially a person who hates humanity but one who may not wish to engage deeply with too many of his species.

Also, the objective-personality-type can be detrimental to marital peace. There are situations in a marriage when the pursuit of truth is not as wise as blindly taking the side of the spouse.

One summer, at a restaurant in Spain, I heard an Indian woman whisper to her husband that the white waitress was a racist. The foolish husband disputed the claim based on the fine logic that the waitress was equally unpleasant to everyone in the restaurant, and that what his wife found repulsive was not racism but a demonstration of European social equality, where a waitress can possess what is generally known as “attitude”. From there, the couple’s lunch was a disaster.

Outside emotional relationships, objectivity is revered. Maybe humans worship objectivity because it can be used to rehabilitate lies, but the social prestige of objectivity has resulted in farcical demonstrations of the virtue. Most famously, India’s claim that it is secular. India is, of course, not a Hindu nation the way Pakistan is Islamic, but India’s idea of secularism is not the dismissal of god but, instead, equal rights for all the gods.

Posturing objectivity is in the heart of some kinds if journalism in the form of “balance”, where to win the right to make a point you have to nominally fabricate “the other side”. You first patiently state a whole lot of things you do not take very seriously, then rubbish them. As Jon Snow says in Game Of Thrones, quoting his father, “Everything before the word ‘but’ is horse shit.”

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.





In defence of the selfie


2017-11-11

More tragic than death is death that is funny. Men perishing during sex, for instance, even though there cannot be a better way to go, or after tripping on one’s own beard, which has happened. In the family of such departures is death by selfie.

Tourists have fallen off mountains, they have drowned, and they have been slammed by trains while taking selfies. As in the case of other deaths, it is not the penultimate act in itself that is funny but the fact that it has led to the final act. In selfie deaths, there is also the ignominy of vanity; the victim was relegating a great monument to the backdrop, and promoting himself to prominence, making his best face, which is usually a serious face because it has no creases, but all along he was only photographing his final moments. Such deaths are rare but they are newsworthy, and a perception has taken root that they are rampant. In several tourist spots around the world, the selfie is banned.

The world is not a serious place at all, especially if we consider humans, yet people have contempt for the selfie precisely because they perceive it as a frivolous activity. Locals and tourists find selfie-takers annoying. Even people who take selfies think poorly of those who take selfies. On yoga day, when Narendra Modi emerges in public, he refuses to let his devotees take selfies with him because the decadence of the selfie has no place against the sacred backdrop of yoga.

Does the selfie deserve more respect?

There does exist a form of selfie that is highly revered. It is serious reading. What is perceived as intellectual consumption is also largely a search for the self in a story or a memoir. I am not being abstract or even metaphorical at all. Readers can be quite specific in their demand to be seen in your story—their childhood, their grandparents, their temples, their cities, their lanes, their loves—and they often see so much of themselves you wonder if all our stories are the same.

The most powerful, hence successful, novels are stories in which a broad constituency, like a gender or failed lovers or a race, are able to see their own lives. This need has over time evolved into a demand—that a reader be shown himself inside a story—which has, naturally, created a supply. When novelists speak of creating characters who “relate” to the reader, they are talking of the high craft of guessing what might make a reader imagine, mistakenly, that it is all about him, and about the unspoken corruption of supplying to this demand.

Readers who seek knowledge from reading, who wish to know more about the universe than themselves, are much rarer than we think.

Almost all of high art is, in reality, a process of showing a mirror to an observer. Most of art, it appears, is a selfie. Often, art is the selfie of the creators themselves which is misunderstood as empathy. Such creations of self-absorption are, of course, presented in respectable disguises as autobiographical novels, memoirs, or even plain self-portraits, one of which might be the most famous painting in the world, Mona Lisa.

Galileo Galilei was right when he said that Earth is not the centre of the universe. It is not Earth, it is we. The universe is some kind of a large pink disc that goes around us. No other sentient being in the universe sees what we see, that exact thing we see. That is why people take photographs wherever they go. We know that far greater photographers have taken unattainably exquisite images of almost everything, but what we are capturing is the fact that we exist, that we were there, that we are important. This self-regard is the core of love, that part of love which is about being loved. We can see it in the sudden sweet faces of people when they speak of their childhood, and also in their valiant faces when they speak of their sacred modern problems, and their concerns about Aadhaar, their vulnerabilities on the social media and other intrusions into their privacy. Fear, these days, is a form of tribute that people give their own precious lives. So many selfies are not called selfies.

Why then must the photographic selfie be treated as an anomaly?

It is now apparent that most humans in possession of a smartphone will take a selfie. That they never used to do this until recently is a matter concerning the nature of cameras, not the nature of humans.

Not only is it natural for humans to take selfies, it is now apparent that they do many things only because they know they can take selfies and broadcast them. Last year, I walked on a frozen river for eight days in the company of some, at least two of whom would not have been there if it were not for the purpose of taking their own images against the slightly less important backdrop of nature. On another trip, men and women plunged into the freezing Antarctic waters partly or chiefly because they were recording themselves as they jumped off the ship. All of us who have social media accounts may often feel that there are people who might not go on vacations or eat or celebrate the birthdays of their children if they cannot take images of those events.

To have contempt for the selfie is to have contempt for the only thing that matters to most people—the little stories of their lives.

Something about the travel selfies that people keep posting reminds me of the travelling gnome, the world’s most popular prank, in which someone steals the clay midget from a person’s garden and periodically sends the owner photographs of the gnome standing in the foreground of famous places around the world. There is something funny about the travelling gnome, set against the famous backdrop, looking at me from a corner of the frame. When I stare long enough at the tourist selfies, too, I start laughing. I don’t know why. Maybe because all our gods and religions and saints have been asking us to liberate ourselves from the self, while the very symbol of modern civilization has become an average unremarkable human’s self-portrait.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan





Sexual crimes: men, according to men


2017-11-18

One afternoon, about three years ago, the human resources (HR) director of a giant corporation bonded with me over the rights of men. Workplace sexual harassment was in the news and he was alarmed. “These men are not forcing themselves on the women,” he said. “What is happening is, a man is trying to get a woman. A man can have one chance to try. If she says no, he should not try again. If

he tries a second time, only then it is harassment.”

I asked what according to him would happen to a woman in any organization if she rebuffed the “one chance” her boss took. The HR director looked as though he had not considered the matter in this light before but he quickly understood the practical reasons why a man in power should not put his subordinate in such a situation, but then he reasoned that all affairs, by their very nature, begin in inappropriate ways, and that advances are inappropriate only when they fail. A successful misconduct is called office romance. Women expect men to make the move, he said, so men must be given “one chance”.

Corporate sexual villains in India are usually men with a degree of power, but they also appear to be sexually starved middle-aged men who resort to high-risk behaviour. The circumstances and actions of the American film producer Harvey Weinstein and other American celebrities, whom The New York Times series on sexual harassment has exposed, appear to be qualitatively different. Weinstein, who, according to an article in The New Yorker, has been thanked at the annual Oscar ceremonies, “more than almost anyone else in movie history, ranking just after Steven Spielberg and right before God”, is in general perception a man with immense sexual prospects. Yet, the method of sexual gratification he chose was disrespect. He called actresses to his office and surprised them with his nudity. Some of them have accused him of rape. Louis C.K., another one in the long list of famous men who have recently been accused of sexual crimes or misconduct, is among the most admired comedians in the world. Like Weinstein, he appears to be a man with vast sexual prospects. Yet, the sexual advance he chose was to flash his penis to his peers, who did not wish to see it.

Why did these men act in this manner when they did not have to be unethical or criminal to receive sex? We have heard or read versions of some common explanations. When sex is too easy, some or most men will want to raise the stakes. If there is such a thing as sexual Marxism, it would state that it is not sex alone that men seek but the conflict before it. Also, in some men, sexual misconduct is a kink. And in some who are very powerful, the joy of power lies in its abuse.

What we usually do not hear is the matter of humility. Humility, in its most popular form, might be about faking ordinariness, but in reality it is nothing as easy. It is the practised ability to treat the self as subordinate to more important things. Some successful men, it appears, are too arrogant to seek the affection of women. For any man with vast sexual prospects, it takes much humility to woo a woman.

What does the recent spotlight on sexual harassment say about men who do not harass women? Do they discreetly wish to be feted? At the peak of the #MeToo campaign, there was so much hatred for men that I thought some righteous man would start a “Me-Too” campaign for men who have never harassed a woman. That did not happen but I did sense a need among seemingly fine men to be acknowledged. The fact is, some of them never really had the power to harass. Some were decent for the most common reason men are good—they are afraid of being perceived as bad. Some had actually forgotten that as young men they were molesters—some very respectable family men today once used to travel in public buses to feel up college girls, and they assaulted their neighbours on Holi on the pretext of smearing colour. Some of the men who wished to be patted for their decency, surely, were probably always virtuous.

Both fear-induced decency and the more organic, wise decency are creations of the modern age, of training, of many factors coming together. And the current portrayal of the sexual misconduct of powerful men and their lame responses will contribute to the training of a new generation of men. Also, the severity and swiftness of capitalism’s response has raised the stakes. It is now clear that sexual misconduct can be extremely expensive for the perpetrators. The most important anomaly in some harmful men is the gift of shamelessness, and men who are not scared of shame can be persuaded to be scared of destruction.

But then their professional destruction is not exactly punishment for sexual crime, it is merely punishment for getting caught. Will the studios now investigate every rumour, can they even do that? And what do we do with the dead? What do we do with the works of Frank Sinatra and Marlon Brando, who have been accused of rape? They may not be spared either. They will be more defamed in the future than they are now. But yes, the dead do get away to a large extent.

But why are corporations meting out justice when they are not courts, they are not the State? They are, actually. They are empires that need to appease their vast populations of consumers. As long as women have immense commercial power as consumers, capitalism will scramble its fat cats to assure them justice has been done.

But then where is the sense of proportion? The difference between a civilized society and a barbarian state is entirely in a punishment being proportionate to the crime. And what if, in the middle of all this, some innocent men are falsely framed? “It’s all right,” is a response I have heard from women several times over the past few weeks. I heard this at the Bangalore Literature Festival too from a group of women, all of whom were writers. One of them told me, “So much shit has happened to women, some collateral damage is OK.”

“What if the guy kills himself?”

She thought for a moment and said, “It’s all right.”

They do not wish such a misfortune on an individual, a man with a face, but when they consider men as a collective, some “collateral damage is all right”.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets @manujosephsan





A brief review of envy


2017-11-25

Over the past two decades, during chats, I have slipped in a line that is widely attributed to the writer Gore Vidal: “Whenever a friend succeeds, a little something in me dies.” Sometimes I use another aphorism that is attributed to him, “It is not enough to succeed. Others must fail.”

Like the villain who tests a gas mask to check not if it works but if it fails, I use Vidal not to find out who laughs but to see who does not. Only children don’t, and that is not because they are angelic but because they do not find truth funny, yet. I have not met an adult who does not at least chuckle, and some do look as though half their biographies have been told by those lines. I have used Vidal during formal speeches too, and told the audience, not entirely in jest, “I knew you jerks will find it funny”.

We can argue that it is not envy that is evil, but what people choose to do when motivated by it. But then people do not always see or accept what envy makes them do. Mothers who embarrass their young daughters out of envy, spilling their secrets for instance, do give the sin much grander names. How then must we deal with the envy of those who love us?

A colossal mistake I made in my late adolescence and through my 20s was to perceive envy as evidence of hatred. My own, and the envy of others. Boys typically masqueraded insults as jokes to humiliate the close friends they envied, or they bad-mouthed them. Such behaviour was, in my view, an unpardonable sin. Now I see that it was a poor analysis of envy, which cost me thousands of hours of companionship.

Some philosophical apologists of envy would say that envy is a form of affection, which I think is nonsense, but what is hard to dispute is that people can love a person and at once be envious, and even act in mildly malicious ways. In response we should develop the humour to forgive. Envy is a natural derivative of the most important quality of friendship—equality.

The ancient Greek poet Hesiod in Works And Days says that envy is primarily between equals. He writes, as translated by Hugh G. Evelyn-White, “…potter is angry with potter, and craftsman with craftsman, and beggar is jealous of beggar, and minstrel of minstrel.”

Across the ages, many writers and philosophers, including Aristotle, Bertrand Russell and David Hume, have stumbled upon the insight or plagiarized from ancient greats that envy is a fault line among equals. At first glance, the hypothesis seems obvious.

I remember when I was in college, students from second-rung engineering colleges wished harm on those from the Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs). There was, of course, tongue-tied adoration that led to bizarre exchanges:

“Do you believe in God?” one second-rung engineering boy asked an IITian.

“Yes.”

“What a coincidence, even I believe in God.”

But the same devout also hated the IITians and maliciously scorned their rubber slippers and their disorientation in the presence of girls. Literature students, like me, who did not appear to have any prospects at all and whose future was far more bleak than that of the second-rung engineering boys, did not envy the IITians. We got along very well. Only those who were and would once again in the material world be in competition with the IITians envied them. Envy, it appeared, was not a consequence of deprivation, but a thing among peers.

This is the same principle that is behind why contemporary Indian novelists, when asked to name their favourite Indian writers, usually name R.K. Narayan or Kiran Nagarkar. The two writers are beyond competition, beyond the grouses of peers. This is also the reason why Indian literary awards do not make any sense. The jury, which usually consists of writers and academics with moderate success, tend to reward debutants or provincial unknowns, who are not equals, or literary superstars, who again are not equals. A literary jury made up of hugely successful writers, with a high threshold for envy, would throw up a very different set of award winners.

The best thing about success is that it reduces the number of people you would envy.

Envy is not a tribute. There is in fact an insult encoded within envy—that the envious think they are as good as you and that if they were only as lucky as you, they would have received your success.

Envy is inert in some people, murderous in others. There is a view among modern philosophers that there is good envy and bad envy. Hesiod is probably the originator of this view. He states the verse that I have quoted earlier, “potter is angry with potter…“, in the context that envy can motivate people to better themselves. In The Symposium, Plato says that a poet who is envious of a more successful poet might be motivated to write better poems. I find this hard to accept. Every writer attempts to write the best he can every time he sits to write. You cannot watch the success of other writers, spit on your hands, slap your thighs and say now you are going to write something great. It does not work like that. Knowingly or unknowingly what people actually envy in others is the same as what they adore—luck.

There have been many other scholarly attempts to project envy as something more reputable than it appears to be. The Roman philosopher Marcus Tullius Cicero wrote, “Compassion and envy are consistent in the same man; for whoever is uneasy at anyone’s adversity is also uneasy at another’s prosperity.” The way I read this statement, he is arguing that envy is empathy gone rogue. This then is the most honourable explanation why compassionate liberals are also so often bitterly jealous people.

On the other end of the intellectual spectrum is Chanakya, who defames envy. He says “only lazy and poor people” develop envy, and that “prostitutes envy loyal women, and widows envy married women”. This is, actually, the popular view of envy—that people who long for something envy those who possess it. Yet when we think about the matter we can see that it is not as convincing as the view that envy is primarily a tension between equals. A prostitute may wish she were not one, but she is more likely to be envious of a more beautiful prostitute than a woman who is not in the trade.

But Chanakya might be right when envy is viewed in a particular way.

Let us first consider a question: Do the poor envy the rich?

We are trained to believe they do. Chanakya would say they do. But then this hypothesis can be demolished by another question: Do you envy Mukesh Ambani? I can guess the answer. Hesiod, we can see, was right—people are more likely to envy their colleagues more than their billionaires. But Chanakya is vindicated when we consider the fact that there is a distinction between private envy and social envy.

In social envy, we envy people we do not know personally, we do not envy them as individuals but as a collective. Democracy has empowered this form of envy. In fact, electoral democracy is a process of venting our social envies. In an election, the potter does not envy potter; they collaborate and attempt to trounce those whom they envy, those who claim they are “shining”.

But most of the time, we live in the personal. And may I suggest the most efficient way to harm your foes. No plotting, no retribution. Just do very well.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

@manujosephsanlounge@livemint.com





Should we hide death from children?


2017-12-09

Someone must have whispered into her ear that she had turned 100, she just let go, rolled up her eyes, opened her mouth wide and died. She was only 98. She loved her sons fiercely and imagined that their skin was fairer than it actually was; she grew to admire her daughters in her old age; enjoyed the sight of little girls finally when they appeared in the shapes of great-granddaughters; and strictly speaking, she never broke the law while dealing with her daughters-in-law. She was of a time and place, and appeared to be puzzled by everything else. Once, according to family legend, she thought everyone at home was being too respectful of their young neighbour, Mrs Banerjee, and insisted on calling her “Banner”.

A dead old woman is absurdly little. In the house of her eldest son, as she lies on the floor, she is just a long smudge in the white shroud. There are only eight people in the house and as they have not seen death often they do not know what they must do. Can they sit on chairs? Can she be left alone in the room? Should there be flowers on the body, and are roses all right? How is a woman cremated, does one call the crematorium and set up a time, and where exactly is such a place? Do you need a death certificate to burn the dead? But the most serious confusion is about whether the matriarch’s great-granddaughters should be summoned from school to say their goodbyes to the old woman who used to break into a fond toothless smile upon seeing them and whom the girls gaped at with affection and bafflement.

There is a view that children “should not be protected” from unpleasantness and that they must see all sides of life, which, of course, includes death. But one of the great-grandchildren of the matriarch is my own nine-year-old daughter, and as the question at hand is whether she is ready to see the first corpse of her life, I am suddenly reminded how wrong the world is about almost everything. What must I do? When the girl’s mother and I talk about the matter, we are like two actors who have arrived for the first rehearsal of an argumentative play but do not know the script. That is so rare in a marriage where things that are said have been said before.

Why should a little girl witness the remains of death? What exactly is she going to gain from seeing a corpse lying on a floor? How will she react when she enters the room and sees the lifeless body of a person who has held her in an old woman’s supernatural grip, and whom the girl has defended with an indignant face when she suspected the adults were grumbling about her? And will the girl now seriously question my claim of immortality? Truth is important but why can’t it wait? She is having a perfectly happy day right now at school, socializing with other children and, when she does focus, learning “number places” or something like that. Why must a child be dragged to the bleak reminder that everyone who is dear to her is going to die one day?

But then doesn’t a child have a right to mourn? Every time she has visited this house she has run inside to the matriarch’s room and chatted, and at times looked on at the spectacle of an ancient person doing things. Why must we presume that she is not strong enough to see clearly the remains of the woman and say goodbye? If we deny her this, when she learns later that the matriarch is gone and that her parents had fled through some back door with the body, will the fact mystify death for her more than it should? Will she then think that life is only about happiness, which has to be the most naive way to live, on par with the blankness of people who go through life asking what there is in it for them, what “the takeaway” is. To assume that life that is worth living is only that which has happiness in it, is the same as imagining that the only food worth eating is junk food.

So the question is not when exactly must a little human see the corpse of a beloved but something else. Now that death has occurred in the family, what must be conveyed to a nine-year-old girl: This is too dark for you? Or, look fully and carefully at this very important phenomenon?

We wonder whether a child who is too protected will overreact to the simplest of human miseries, like Prince Siddhartha minus the Bodhi tree. In any case, it is impossible to protect middle-class Indian children from miseries because they see these every day on the roads. The wake of an affluent centurion is going to be far more pleasant than the sight of little stunted children in plain sight begging for food.

The girl whose welfare everyone is debating is one who glares at people who discuss her as though she is not in the room, and who pokes her chest and says, “Excuse me, I am here.” So maybe we should just ask her what she wants to do. The wake or a play date? Also, there are some logistical issues and we do not have a choice but to fetch her early from school.

Very few things can be more morbid for a child than the cryptic message from her teacher that she has to leave early. The girl will know something bad has happened. When someone comes to the school to fetch you early, you are not exactly going to the Swiss Alps.

Everything about death, even the transmission of its news, is so unwieldy, nothing goes smoothly. The school’s security is told of a “death in the family”. The guard is supposed to tell the teacher but when he does not find the teacher in the classroom he breaks the news to the girl, who goes numb, quietly packs her bag and walks to the gates not knowing who has died. Whose death will relieve her? When the guard is confronted, he wonders what the fuss is about. He says, what is the big deal in telling a child someone in the family has died?

The girl is finally told of the demise of the matriarch. She cries. At first she does not wish to see the body but then she is very clear she wants to.

She walks into the house and sees the shrouded sliver of a corpse. She seems fine, but does not say anything about the matter. There are many relatives about now, and more mourners are trickling in every minute, but she is the only child around. Her cousins have been “protected”.

There is chatter in the house—about vacations and demonetization and future plans, lots of future plans. This is the triumph of a very old lady—there is melancholy in her brood, not trauma. I am grateful the girl is able to sense it. She too begins to talk about mundane things; 20ft away, the body gains shawls and flowers.

I attempt to interview the little girl.

“What is going on inside your head right now?”

“This is evil interview.”

“Why evil? Do you mean gloomy, sad?”

As is her habit, she begins to ask the questions.

“What do you prefer,” she asks, “burying or burning?”

“I hate this topic.” It is, suddenly, me who is not prepared for the grand subject of death.

“Burying or burning?” she asks.

“I don’t know.”

“Electric or logs?”

“I don’t know.”

“If you are buried, there will be worms getting into your nose,” she says.

She then sings and mutters nonsense and talks about her life and times.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan





What do idealists want?


2017-12-16

There is an Indian melancholy all through the film An Insignificant Man. At first it is hard to understand this familiar ache. It is odd because the documentary on the famous victory of the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP), which was released in cinemas after demands by the censor board were fought off, ends in a happy place, when the small good guys beat the giant practical villains.

So, is it the bare sight of Indian politicians that makes us sad, those men with cunning high-carb faces? Or is it the absence of joy in the masses who gather, and the inevitability of their doom? But slowly we accept that the sorrow emanates from the very hero, Arvind Kejriwal, once the beloved of all.

It is there in his deep seriousness; there when he tells the poor that he will change their lives; when party workers high on morality argue with him over how their voices are not heard while choosing electoral candidates and he tells them that he too has the right to speak; and when someone throws ink at him and he looks baffled. And in the end when he triumphs and his fans carry him, and it is then that he looks frightened and he blurts out the beautiful line that he is just “an insignificant man”.

What exactly does Kejriwal want? Is his wish for the welfare of humans more than what most of us feel, or does he want them to transform in a particular way that he approves of? Is his humanitarian mission the promotion of a personal interpretation of welfare? Is he an idealist, or merely a very good man? Only the naïve will think the two are the same.

When Kejriwal left the low-stakes world of activism and entered electoral politics vowing to be naïve, the old guard laughed. In the film, a Congress politician takes a dig at Kejriwal and says idealists are good for a fling but make lousy husbands.

From his statements and his actions so far, what Kejriwal wants is to create a political system that is under immense pressure to be clean so that the people who are dependent on the government for their very existence will have better lives. What is idealistic about this? Only in India and other corrupt nations will someone like him be called an idealist. But then a person is what he is in his circumstance. As the bar in India is low for clean politics, we can consider Kejriwal an idealist, but one, like Barack Obama, whose objectives are clear and sane.

There is another idealist in the film, Yogendra Yadav, a former member of AAP, who emerges from the story as a man more pious than Kejriwal. He has presented himself to the cameras of the film-makers with greater cunning than Kejriwal. There are several scenes where Yadav has his palms covering his face in apparent frustration when the party faces accusations of corruption. In one comical shot, he is clearly posing for the camera, covering his eyes as we hear hostile television news in the background. A man who always knows where the cameras are, he maintains the appearance of some superior outsider trying to save a bumbling outfit. Many reviewers of the film have considered Yadav, who is verbally articulate, to be the hero of the film, which is similar to the admiration of Nehruvian sportswriters for Rahul Dravid.

What does Yadav want? He is in the classical mould of an idealist. What he appears to want is primarily to transmit the fact that he is idealistic. His allegiance is to the perception of him. It is a common personality type upon whom a beer bottle will fall if you fling it on a congregation of artists, academics and posh boys who write long-form.

Most idealists are usually from the social and economic elite but feel inadequate in a changing world, or in a society where it has suddenly become expensive to remain rich, a price they cannot afford any more. Idealists formed by such economic forces are not charlatans. They may not accept their social dejection as the cause but they really do seek a noble activist goal, they get obsessed by a glorious thought experiment that can never be a reality, a pursuit that then becomes a war against their more successful adversaries. Usually, this happens among the middle-aged, but of late we see many young people, terrified by their low chances in capitalism, seeking refuge in idealism, where they finally gain respect.

The most powerful idealists are a bit complex. They are often elite victims of insults from another group of elites. Their revenge is harvested through idealism. This is the Gandhian touch to idealism. In the book The South African Gandhi: Stretcher-Bearer Of Empire, authors Ashwin Desai and Goolam Vahed say that in 1893, when Gandhi considered himself among the elite of South Africa, he wrote a letter that stated: “I venture to point out that both the English and the Indians spring from a common stock, called the Indo-Aryan…. A general belief seems to prevail in the Colony that the Indians are little better, if at all, than savages or the Natives of Africa. Even the children are taught to believe in that manner, with the result that the Indian is being dragged down to the position of a raw Kaffir.” And, in 1904, he wrote that the Johannesburg municipal council “must withdraw the Kaffirs (blacks) from the Location. About this mixing of the Kaffirs with the Indians, I must confess I feel most strongly. I think it is very unfair to the Indian population and it is an undue tax on even the proverbial patience of my countrymen.”

We will never know the exact constellation of factors that led him on the path to modern greatness but it would be naïve to presume that white racism that did not fully acknowledge his brown racism had no role at all.

The celebrity of some idealists in our parts is entirely the creation of an ignorant West’s feudal compulsion to distribute good-behaviour awards, like the Nobel Prize. Aung San Suu Kyi, as we now realize, is among them. She is a Bamar, the Brahmins of Myanmar, who also constitute a majority among the many ethnicities of the nation. Her father was among the most influential Burmese leaders ever. Suu Kyi, very simply, is from an elite class that fought her oppressors using the full force of idealism, which includes the propagation of a political system that favours her and gives her an unfair advantage over the common Burmese. But the Western acclaim-distribution system saw in her everything it wanted to see in the “other people”—a suave, English-speaking, beautiful female who was very Western but Burmese. This is very similar to how the US space agency Nasa searches for extraterrestrial life—something made of carbon that is dependent on water, or something that is human but a bit exotic.

Now that Suu Kyi is part of the government, of the system, she has no patience for humanitarian posturing. She has refused to accept that there was “a genocide” of Rohingya Muslims. Usually, people who win the Nobel Peace Prize do not deny a genocide when The New York Times suggests there was one. Instead, to the horror of the global good guys, she suddenly appears to be a conservative hardliner.

Like Suu Kyi, Arvind Kejriwal ceased to be the beloved of a class when he became something more than a gadfly, when he became the system. The same will happen to Kanhaiya Kumar, the world’s most famous “student leader”, the reason why he does not become an adult. When an idealist begins to succeed and becomes useful, he ceases to be one. The romantic then steps out of the circle of adoration to do something more difficult than merely be lovable.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets @manujosephsan





What intellectuals who are often wrong teach us about hope


2017-12-23

Hope is a lapse in concentration. It is, of course, many beautiful things, but at its core it is a distraction that pretends to be analysis.

This is one reason why Indian intellectuals who wish to see the end of Prime Minister Narendra Modi get the public perception of his policies and the prediction of election results completely wrong. Again and again. Last week, Yogendra Yadav, the academic activist, confused hope with psephology and interpreted spurious data to conclude that the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) “is in for a shock defeat” in Gujarat. He even gave figures. Other observers expressed their hope through the more cautious analysis that the contest between the BJP and the Indian National Congress was going to be “neck and neck”. In the end, the BJP prevailed in Gujarat, and won Himachal Pradesh. The intellectuals continue to see hope in the results—they see a dimming of Modi’s future prospects. The curse of ideology is that it gets people addicted to hope.

The public display of how hope dooms political analysis should make us probe the private life of hope. What does the failure of hopeful psephologists teach us about how we must live? Is hope the wrong reason we do the right things, like wanting to live in this mist of anticipation? When we analyse our lives, when we consider all the facts and make an important decision, how deeply influenced are we by hope? Is it even possible to liberate our reasoning from hope? There are people who can, people who possess the gift of intuition, which is not as common as it is made out to be.

The best political analysis in India is privately delivered, off-the-record, by sharp politicians to friends or public figures whom they admire, which usually does not include journalists. They have the talent to see the truth in the forest of hope even when it confirms their greatest fears. I have heard of such analyses, and when they are predictions they often come true. Their accuracy, I believe, is a consequence of a level of intuition that has the capacity to overwhelm hope.

Intuition has supernatural trappings, it is an answer that anticipates the question. A person with the gift is often unable to articulate what is very obvious to him because the reasoning is yet to arrive in their head. But the intuitive can see their circumstances with greater clarity than most people.

In a mind that is not guarded by intuition, hope spreads like an infestation, followed by despair when reality turns out to be something else. Liberal political analysis in India, as in many parts of the world, demonstrates this swing. They saw the destruction of Modi in Jawaharlal Nehru University student Kanhaiya Kumar, “demonetization”, farmer agitations, Aadhaar, and the rise of communal killings, the complex goods and services tax. Are some people more susceptible to hope than others? Why?

Hope is also a form of fatigue. Our intense gaze at the future hurts our body. Not metaphorically, but it really does take a toll on the body. And the body tries to fool us, as it often does, to conserve itself. It fools us into believing beautiful lies, and the probability of events, and the finality of things, so that we will relax. This is how we love “The One”, and how writers decide on the “Final Draft” of a novel—as victims of a tired body using the farce of adoration to stop the pursuit and just rest. Maybe the secret to a good mind lies in physical exercise that increases the body’s threshold for tricking us. As the late yoga guru B.K.S. Iyengar once said, “How can you know God if you don’t know your big toe?”

The ideologues who keep seeing the electoral defeat of Modi are men in deep fatigue who see happy mirages. Their hope often mutates into a convenient misunderstanding of people: that they are naïve, simple, foolish, hence can be “educated” during the next election campaign.

I once asked the Australian novelist Richard Flanagan, who won the Man Booker Prize in 2014, whether the pre-eminence of hope is a creation of storytellers across the ages, because hope is a great plot device. You try to write a story without hope, or watch a movie that has no hope, and you will know. I believe there are tribes and cultures that have less hope than others, that they are trained to be less hopeful. Flanagan did not agree. He felt hope is too deeply human to be a contribution of culture.

But every time I see Indian road traffic, and other forms of our chaos, I am more certain than ever that in the heart of our disorder is a slight excess of hope. We feel we can drive on the wrong side of an eight-lane expressway, and get away. “In the end,” we believe, “everything works out fine.”

Many of us are not only victims, but beneficiaries of hope. We passed through a hard period, and unlike those who did not make it through, we were filled with hope. When we look back, we see that the reasoning on which the hope was built was faulty but we were lucky we did not know it then. As a result, we were saved.

So, is clarity really more important than hope, especially if clarity brings gloom, as it should, to the intellectuals whose prospects depend on the end of Modi? Most people probably pass through life with great grace, blinded by hope rather than the clarity of vision. It is amusing that even political analysts do.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

The writer tweets at @manujosephsan





Marriage in the time of politics


2018-01-13

Once I had a vision in which God asked a young man, “Why did you get married”, and the young man said, “To have fun”. And even though God did not intend to be rude, a great laughter escaped him. People on streets too began to laugh. All the women in the Ladies’ Special held their stomachs and laughed. The men dangling from train compartments laughed. Even Mahatma Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru, in their framed portraits, began to laugh.

The most sacred tenet of modern marriage, which has been seeded by the marriage counselling industry and advice journalism, is that “marriage is hard work”. It is a foolish analysis and probably one of the most destructive ideas to infest the young. Marriage should be fun. It can be fun. That is if it is not confused with eternity. An eternal marriage does sound like hard work but that is because eternity, and not marriage, is hard work.

Many tenets of marriage do not make any sense to the married. Many of them look for clarity and epiphanies in novels and films and TED talks and counselling. The one place they do not look is in politics. At first glance there appears to be nothing that politics can teach us about marriage, but there is a political quality to the relationship that is not appreciated enough.

There is a set of modern marital behaviour that is directly a part of modern political behaviour. The public posturing of the sophisticated class contains a set of crucial qualities—the high moral ground, self-interest masquerading as righteous indignation, the veneration of frailties, and ceaseless lament—which have entered marriages too along with more honourable political ideas like equality, fairness and dignity of labour. The narcissism that inspires people to give themselves labels extends into the marriages today where individuals describe themselves in specific ways to be allowed contentious behaviour—“sensitive”, “depressive”, and “emotionally fatigued”.

But the deepest crucial political qualities of marriage are not influenced by politics. They have parallels in politics, they are similar to political behaviour. The marital quarrel, for instance.

The intellectual worth of debate in public life is vastly overstated. A debate, in reality, is the T20 of intellectual activities. It is largely a test of speed and immediacy, which leaves almost the entire human spectrum untested. Verbal articulation, as the articulate know, is a charlatan talent. Everybody wings it. But there is no denying that some are good at it, and as they debate more frequently, they get better. This happens to couples, too. The longer they are married, the more they quarrel and their quarrels get better because they know the other’s best lines. But what is political about the marital quarrel is the fact that it is useless. Its outcome does not affect the outcome of the marriage. In most cases, a marriage is neither saved nor destroyed by debate; the winner wins nothing, the loser loses nothing. It is the nature and the tone of the debate that is important. This has always been true of political debates. Even though they are huge television spectacles in many countries, their intellectual outcome hardly affect the elections. What is important in a debate is not the rationality of the argument but the person who emerges from the smog of words.

In many marriages men devise the strategy of avoiding quarrels. It serves them well in other relationships—like eccentric, ageing parents. But what works with parents never really works in an equal marriage, which is a coalition of two pressure groups. A marriage is reassured of its aliveness and freedom through the acrimony of a good fight when all truths are hurled.

In love, the rewards are always over the top, but so is retribution for hurt. A long, post-love marriage is often filled with retributions that are out of proportion to the sins, but a couple in an upper-class democratic system is constantly aware of this and is under pressure to be proportionate even though proportionality is not a fundamental natural force, it is a mere ideal and a fabrication of the justice system.

And, in both marriage and politics, the invocation of history is not a good sign. Because history is often a wound. Also, it is severely contested. No side is lying, both sides are believers in a convenient version of the wound.

People use the term “happy couples” without care as though two humans can exhibit properties of a sofa-cum-bed, a happy sofa-cum-bed. There are even scientific researches done on “happy couples”. But can two humans ever be a collective organism? What if happiness in a long relationship is a zero-sum affair, what if the happiness of one is built on the sacrifice of the other? If you are of a generation, you may think of the lives of your mothers. This is not the political side of marriage. Just the opposite.

Politics is not altruism, it is too ambitious for that. Amusing then that a crafty politician like Nelson Mandela had once stated that you can achieve much in politics if you do not wish to take credit. We instantly see the wisdom in his statement but we also know what he was talking about cannot be politics. There are bureaucrats and cops who achieve great things because they choose to be anonymous. But politics is about being in plain sight, it is about taking credit. That is, in fact, the political side of couplehood, too. To be seen by the other, that is what being married is. To be seen and acknowledged and praised, and in the early days even adored. Singlehood is a form of anonymity. To be married is to have a witness to your days, and to, inevitably, preen.

Couplehood is not only a private arrangement but also a public act. Every couple tries to be good ambassadors of marriage. Marriage is often a public event, a social campaign (some days I feel that there are only two reasons why there is so much happiness on Facebook—couples marketing marriage, and people trying to make their former lovers sad).

When people propose in public, or throw surprise parties for their spouses, they are not only committing an act of love, they are also campaigning, performing, promoting themselves and stepping into the spotlight. A public display of affection is often a political moment.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan





What Madras taught me about going home


2018-01-20

The cricket icon Krishnamachari Srikkanth reached into his shirt for the sacred thread and did not find it for a moment. Upon finding it he showed it to the strangers in the room and said that he is proud to be a Hindu. He said he is a “Hindu guy, Hindutva guy”. And he said, “This is a Hindu country.” In the authors’ lounge at The Hindu’s literature festival last week, he was having an informal conversation after learning the topic of an impending panel discussion—“Why is India’s secular nationalism under attack?“. “This is Hindustan,” he said, “This is Hindustan. We are only letting Muslims and Christians live with us.”

I was surprised but the reason is not what you probably have in mind. I have never heard a Tamilian say “Hindustan” before. The rest of what he said did not bother me. My first two decades were in Chennai and I am accustomed to people speaking their minds and when they are at it, pulling their poonal (sacred thread) out, and even groping for it first. Usually they say things with no malice.

It was inevitable that something about science will follow. “I can scientifically prove in 15 minutes that India is a Hindu country,” he said.

“All right,” I said.

“I can prove it in 5 minutes actually,” he said, gathering his thoughts. Then he said, “Or at least you will not be able to scientifically disprove it.” The scientific proof never came.

I was home. My childhood was filled with such moments. Even nationalism never seemed morbid when you heard it in Chennai. It is more comic lament than threat. And I love how even in its most stupid moments the city will invoke science. It is never some sacred book, or a quote, in Chennai it is usually science. “I will scientifically prove that…” There is a long list of things that can fill the blanks, and they are a parallel emotional history of the great loveable city.

Do we love only what is good and what is excellent? When we are asked why we love what we love we search for great reasons. Maybe that is not necessary. When I left Madras (now Chennai) in 1995, through its giant railway station, I was fleeing a dirty parched chaotic corrupt ugly nepotistic city for better prospects and hopefully sexual decadence, and since then refused to accept that I had any love for a mere place just because I spent the first 20 years of my life there. People who spoke with great affection about their unremarkable hometowns, I thought, were only exhibiting the delirium of narcissism. But I am now developing an affection for Chennai as the allure of homelessness is fading. What is so wrong to belong to a place? I always thought something was wrong with that sort of thinking. I thought we can never be free if we belong. But that is a tiring sort of existence.

The modern urban Indian is a cultural orphan, as a result he keeps finding false homes. In ideologies, faiths, moral convictions and cosy clubs and foreign cultures that do not care about him. Maybe we should just fall towards our real homes, the places that raised us. What the hometown has is time, our epic early histories. We love nothing more than ourselves and what we see in the hometown is ourselves.

People tell me that Chennai has changed a lot since the time I left it but I see mostly the same city. Men do not bounce on their dowry scooters to kick-start them, but I can still steal from my novel that was set in the Madras of the 1990s to describe the Chennai of today. In the mornings, in the TamBrahm colony where I grew up, as in many other lanes, there is still the fragrance of the same paradisiacal breakfasts, and the chant of Carnatic singer M.S. Subbulakshmi from a thousand devices. Cycling to some tutorial is still the same type of a young man—antiquated, a thick steel watch on the wrist, oiled hair combed in the good-boy hairstyle, and looking like the past of an old man.

Actor Rajinikanth has been gentrified, which is where his cinematic destruction lies, but he is still a public mascot of the city. The hoarding painters still paint his face pink instead of black. Hysteria is still a dialect of Tamil.

The Chennai of my time is in turn an ancient way of the world. My new affection for my roots is, apart from narcissism, a result of a fatigue with a kind of modernity that requires you to be homeless. When you are homeless you are perpetually in the sway of dominant cultures, and I am sick of both the north Indian and Western ways. To be modern now is, at times, beginning to feel clownish. Also, the idea of “global” is clearly more farcical than liberal. “Global” is a quality that exists only in relation to the West; “global” is what white people call that part of human culture that is distant and exotic but still comprehensible to them. This we know from “global literature”, “global cinema”, “global food” and other such inanities.

We do not know what we are when we are global, we have a better grasp over ourselves when we see ourselves at home, as creations of what our hometowns taught us to love and hate, accept and reject. What may have Madras taught me? That melodrama is not a form of mediocrity. That an actor knows acting only if he can cry and laugh at the same time, everyone else is just making faces. That ultimately how you fight colonizers is not flinging grenades at them but by persisting with your traditions and tiring them out. That we should be secretive about important things. That at any given moment in the world, someone is a Brahmin, someone is not, and what the Brahmin loves is always called culture, and what the others love is called folk.

I had once renounced the idea of home because I thought I had no use of it. It was an unfair place for a person with no social networks and I had prospered outside it. Also, I thought being attached to my hometown will make me a petty village romantic who confused self-absorption with heritage and conservation. But then, it now appears that I was never really too far from home. As the 18th century German writer Novalis wrote, “Where are we really going? Always home.”

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan





The compassion of the ‘Dangal’ diet


2018-01-26

They eat bread but we get along. They were coming home for dinner so I had to sneak into a dealer’s place and score a whole loaf. The things we have to do for friends. I was wearing a hooded jacket but the boys in the pastry shop recognized me. I thought they were trying to suppress a laugh, and all the addicts in the bakery too. They were thinking, “Eventually everybody falls”. I wanted to scream, “It’s not for me.” Outside, it was broad daylight and there were children about, including little girls, who have a moral compass, and I tried to hide the loaf with my elbow. A passing old woman surely tried not to meet my eyes; she was probably widowed by maida (refined flour). I hoped I will not encounter anyone who knows me, and I remembered the time when I was a boy and my father sent me to buy rum from the local store, and I thought that if any classmate saw me with the liquor, I would hold my breath and die of shame.This is exactly what happens to me every time I am sent to buy bread. I am happy to be seen holding a Chetan Bhagat, but not bread. White bread, brown bread, other bread are, for all practical purposes, blobs of sugar.About five years ago, I quit all kinds of grain in the hope of running the half marathon in under 85 minutes. Some days I yield, but I know that modern mainstream food is a civilizational failure and a diabolic triumph of culture, which is the delivery device of a drug called sugar. You might be happy to learn that the latest diet book to hit India argues that people like me are completely wrong.

It is Dr Dhurandhar’s Fat-Loss Diet by Nikhil Dhurandhar, whom the actor Aamir Khan had consulted for his role in the film Dangal, in which Khan had first gained a lot of kilos and then lost almost all of it to gain muscle.The book is compassionate about the entire spectrum of the human condition, including ignorance. One woman who had come to the doctor to solve her obesity problem thought she was fat because cold winter air was trapped in her. Another woman had come to him after the failure of a therapy that involved being beaten with a cricket bat—to “break down” her fats.

But the most compassionate aspect of the book is in asking you to continue to eat what you love as long as you reduce the portions and shift protein-heavy meals to daytime. The doctor is a man who appears to accept that life is worth living chiefly because of the decadence of food. He even lets you have dessert. He himself consumes them. In fact, he is most compassionate about sugar, and highly refined grain like maida and white rice, which release sugar quickly into the bloodstream. Every diet, like all good stories, needs a villain, and his is old-fashioned—fat. This makes the book highly unusual.

Processed carbohydrates are the most disgraced forms of food in modern scientific dieting. Fat—like oil, butter and ghee—has been rehabilitated and recognized as a victim of the campaigns of the sugar lobby. I have full faith in this hypothesis. In my own experience, and the experience of those who are close to me, I have seen the extraordinary and transformative benefits of quitting grain, especially refined grain.

In most cultures, especially Indian, the very act of asking a person to quit grain is devoid of compassion. Carbohydrates from wheat and rice work exactly like a drug and the immediate consequence of quitting, for most people, is sorrow. Also, they are then confused about what exactly they must eat as the very anchor of all meals is food made from grain.

In Why We Get Fat, which was released in 2010, Gary Taubes makes an argument that is compassionate but he limits his compassion to the fact that excess weight is not a character flaw. The genes and hormonal regulation in most people, and not food, make them grow fatter as they age. We do not become fat because we overeat, he writes, we overeat because we are fat. “Anything that increases its mass, for whatever reason, will take in more energy than it expends.”

That overeating is the effect of becoming fat, and not the cause, has to be the most compassionate argument in dieting. For those who are unlucky enough to store fat easily—most of the world actually—there is one piece of information that can transform their bodies and health. Why and how do people get fat? The main character in the drama is a hormone called insulin, which has a Pavlovian connection with carbohydrates. “You think about eating a meal containing carbohydrates,” writes Taubes, and you begin to secrete insulin, which alters the flows of fatty acids in the cells, in turn making you hungrier. When you begin to eat, you secrete more insulin. The refined carbs you consume meanwhile quickly enter the bloodstream as glucose, a sugar, which makes the body release even more insulin, which works to ensure that we do not burn our fat as energy and instead store it in our fat cells in the form of a large cluster of three molecules called triglyceride. The triglyceride, once formed, is too large to leave the fat cell, he says, like a piece of furniture that has been assembled in a room and cannot be taken out in one piece.

“If we can get our insulin levels to drop sufficiently low…we can burn our fat. If we can’t, we won’t.” And refined carbs are the major contributors to the secretion of insulin, which is the only hormone in the body that works to make us fatter. This is all we need to know to be lean.

The central compassion of Dr Dhurandhar is in the advocacy of moderation. He does not ask you to abstain from grain and sugar, but reduce the quantity. Compassion is an effective way to persuade people to make realistic changes. Most people do not wish for perfection at the expense of habit and fun; something reasonable will do. That is why moderation is more popular than abstinence. But this is precisely the reason why most people will fail to lose fat or get healthier. Moderation is compassionate but intrinsically ineffective compared to abstinence. His most famous client, Aamir Khan, did not achieve his goal through moderation.

Abstinence gives you a clear direction. There is no confusion. It is all or nothing. Moderation is ambiguous. At times it is as fantastical as Barack Obama’s imagination of the “moderate Taliban”. The totality and wisdom of abstinence is the only way to quit powerful addictions and stay that way, as present and former smokers know. Also, human nature is such that abstinence occasionally becomes moderation anyway, but moderation always balloons into excess. If we consider the seven deadly sins, human society has been able to abstain from these vices with the help of religious and ethical pressure. These have slowly escalated to the level of moderation. If our religions had allowed these vices in moderation, whole civilizations would have collapsed in complete decadence.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan





Is there happiness in quitting love?


2018-02-10

In another time, people who were romantically inert were known to us as parents. Our own, perhaps, and the parents of peers. Just as they never spent their savings on the Alaskan cruise, they did not spend their time loving an adult. So dead was their love, they were too tired to even hate. The only time they came close to resembling lovers was when they spoke to each other in low decibels, as though they were accomplices, but if you overheard them, that illusion too would have dissolved. The generation before them, in the form of very old couples, seemed to be more entwined but that was merely a coalition of necessity. In fact, some of those old women, when they were widowed, grew healthier, a light returned to their eyes and their skin began to glow.

But all things considered, the abandonment of love in the people before us had some kind of peace in it, which was similar to the peace of defeat, the peace of giving up. Like what you see on the faces of the jovial chubby people who have quit dieting. Now a much younger generation has abandoned love, and at first glance it does not appear to be a tranquil forsaking. They are disappointed with the nature of modern love, which is the total chaos of freedom triumphing over the dictatorship of tradition. They are disappointed with lovers and what they themselves become as lovers. But when they speak of giving up love, they also speak of the relief of singlehood and how they are not frightened at all by the certainty of loneliness. They are suddenly not counting on anyone else to make them happy, which has to be the most assured path to happiness. And they have so many plans.

But what exactly do they mean when they say they are off love? Are they only rebuking their former lovers? The writer Chinki Sinha, who is 38, the life of any party, and nostalgic about anything as long as it happened at least 24 hours earlier, says that what she means by quitting love is abolishing the very hope that love can do her any good, that “love can help me get over my anxiety issues, or my fear of ghosts”.

Love is in a perpetual crisis because there is no such thing as equal love; as a result, someone is always distraught. The notion of equality itself, in all human matters, is a thought experiment, an ideal that never occurs. Sinha has been a perpetrator and victim of love’s inequalities, but on balance she has beautiful memories. Once she went to meet a man who was a stranger and a prospect, and on the bookshelf she found Pier Paolo Pasolini, the Italian poet and film-maker. On “Page 19” was the line, “Something has already begun.” She believed it was a cosmic message about her and the man whose bookshelf it was. “I go up to him and take his hand.” At its peak, on its best day, “Love made me believe in signs.”

Divya Guha, who is in her 30s too, once started a company that sold vintage goods, “nicely packaged, cool shit”. A writer then and now, she says the best moments of love have been when it has come in simple ways. “A coffee and a kiss in the morning.” Despite the affection she has for the very idea of love, she has decided to abandon it because “you pay a high price for the little luxuries. When the beautiful period is over, you feel like you’re being made to pay for something that you never bought.”

Both the women, like many in their position, are disenchanted with men. They are drawing closer to other women, into tighter circles of women like them. “I’ve noticed with this awful scar on my hand,” Guha says. “Not a single woman has missed it. And not a single guy has noticed it except one in a nightclub who had burnt his own hand badly. So I guess women love helplessly and with compassion and more readily.”

Did you learn anything at all from men about love?

“Not trying. As Yoda said, ‘There is no try.’”

They say they are not afraid of loneliness. But is it just the new battle cry of the young? Do people who are unaccustomed to loneliness even know what it does?

Sinha, actually, has been lonely for long. She stares at its face every evening. Mornings do not make her feel as lonely as evenings. There was a time when she thought the refutation of the idea of love would result in a fatal loneliness. Once, after a separation, when she was still in love, she stared from the window of a high-rise at the ground below and thought she would still be in love when she hit the ground. She was then scared of loneliness, but she is much stronger now.

“My aunt used to collect electric bulbs as she grew older because she thought, what if she ran out of bulbs on nights when she was alone? That’s what loneliness did to her. She lived alone and she died in her apartment one night and people found out only the next day. But I have been living on my own for years and I am no longer scared of loneliness. But I like my solitude.”

She believes that it is wrong to pursue love. That is not how you find love, she says. She has given away the wedding ensemble her parents had bought her after her engagement. Of the two garments, her father asked her to keep the more precious one, a golden lehnga. Her mother said she must give away what is more precious to her. Last year, she gave away the golden lehnga to a eunuch prostitute. That was “my final goodbye to love”.

Guha too will not pursue love because of its “emotional price” and her “loss of ego” as a lover. What will she do about sex? “I think I am almost asexual,” she says.

What will replace love? “Nature, strangers and literature.”

They are fleeing love, joining a new restive generation that is attempting a similar escape. But then love, like happiness, lurks down the bend. It has treacherous evolutionary motives. What chance do we have really?

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan





A beautiful moral dinosaur in the age of #MeToo


2018-02-17

There is a kind of man whom other men call “a creep”. A creep, then, is a person who makes men who are not creeps feel they are better people. Yet they may not be so sure when they are in the presence of David Lurie, the humanities professor in Disgrace, a novel by J.M. Coetzee, who is an exquisite writer even though it is true that he won the Nobel Prize for literature.

Lurie teaches Romantic poets and something called “communications” in Cape Town, South Africa. He finds his university’s definition of language as a human medium of communication, ridiculous. “His own opinion, which he does not air, is that the origins of speech lie in song, and the origins of song in the need to fill out with sound the overlarge and rather empty human soul,” according to the novel. Yet, he seduces a young student through the deceits of language. In this the 52-year-old man is not very different from former Italian prime minister Silvio Berlusconi, who compared politics to courting women—“You have to confuse the girls.”

Lurie’s analysis of his actions is transmitted to us through the unrelenting clarity of Coetzee’s prose. There is no defence for the man; there is only the articulation of his circumstances, which is chiefly that he is a man. To this articulation, in my experience over the past several years, most male readers react, at least privately, very differently from women.

When the story opens, Lurie, who is twice divorced, has a convenient arrangement with a beautiful prostitute whom he finds “entirely satisfactory”. He is “technically old enough to be her father; but then, technically, one can be a father at twelve”. He appears to be happy even though he has lost his charms. Once, women returned his glances. His advances often succeeded. It was all easy. Now, “he had to learn to pursue her; often, in one way or another, to buy her”. He flirts with the pretty young student, takes her home. He asks her to spend the night with him. “Because a woman’s beauty does not belong to her alone. It is part of the bounty she brings into the world. She has a duty to share it,” he tells her. She manages to slip away. He finds her telephone number and pursues her. She has no chance really. “Too young. She will not know how to deal with him; he ought to let her go,” he reasons. But he doesn’t. Eventually she has an affair with him, which ends badly, as he expected, and blows into a scandal.

He is disgraced and destroyed. But not to us, at least not to a large section of his readers. Or, maybe we can say there was a time when he was not disgraced and destroyed in the eyes of most of the novel’s readers, including the powerful elite of English literature that decided for us which novels were great. Even though the novel does not defend Lurie even for a moment, the very portrayal of the man, the very act of portrayal, by a master novelist, appears to be a rehabilitation of the “creep”. Not many saints in the history of religion have been granted such a careful, wise and convincing biography. There is even compassion. There is compassion for everyone in the book, but for Lurie too, which is the point.

If Disgrace, published in 1999, were to release today, it would probably be destroyed. It will not be banned, it will not be so lucky as to receive notoriety. It will just vanish. There is too much anger at men like Lurie. Coetzee is too honest and too courageous not to write Disgrace today if he so wishes. But that work will be doomed, it will not be celebrated by influential women or even by conscientious modern men who constantly try to guess how to be good men.

Even at the time of publication, the book had enraged blacks, for its portrayal of blacks, and women for the very existence of Lurie and an extraordinary decision his daughter makes towards the end of the novel. One Gertrude Makhaya, reviewing Coetzee in 2004, wrote in a literary magazine of the Oxford University that carrying Disgrace in public drew reactions. “Once, a young white waitress who had just graduated from high school hovered around my table and eventually came out with it and warned me about how shocking and terrible the book is.”

Today, the book will be punished in devastating and organized ways. We have not regressed perhaps, or that is what everyone tells me, yet we live in a highly moral age in some regard. Is it a loss then? If some kinds of novels and some kinds of writers are fated to fail? If Disgrace had come and gone without creating a ripple, without winning the Man Booker Prize, would we have been poorer? Even lovers of great novels, including Disgrace, tell me there are things in this world that are more important than the right of Disgrace to succeed. Not its right to exist, but to succeed. One of them, a woman in her early 40s, told me that the ingenious prose of Coetzee brings a certain tenderness to Lurie. In the real world, the “creeps” are usually not men who investigate their own crassness with so much sophistication. So the artistic veneration of such a novel, she said, is also a veneration of the discredited view that men are victims of biology.

In a scene, Lurie observes that the hips of his prey and student, Melanie, “are as slim as a twelve-year-old’s”. This may remind some of you of the most famous 12-year-old in Western literature—Vladimir Nabokov’s Lolita, and another middle-aged professorial predator. Would Lolita be consecrated as a masterpiece today? Especially this iconic tribute to a child: “Lolita, light of my life, fire of my loins”?

The defamation of Disgrace will be more complex. It is a novel that is more difficult to take apart than Lolita, which will further enrage a segment of sophisticated readers, but the deed will be done for a number of moments in the book.

Even as Melanie is grappling with her confusion, the “hero” of Disgrace, Lurie, surprises her in her flat and carries her to the bedroom. She does not resist, even helps him strip her, but he knows there is something very wrong about what he is doing. “Not rape, not quite that, but undesired nevertheless…. As though she had decided to go slack, die within herself for the duration, like a rabbit when the jaws of the fox close on its neck.”

Later, when he gets into trouble, Lurie tells us, as though we ever argued, that he is guilty. Lurie also shows up the inquisitors appointed by the college as a bunch of simpletons, whose righteous indignation looks foolish beside Lurie’s own calm analysis of his disgrace. Upon being asked whether he was serious about the affair with the girl, Lurie tells us, winning many of us immediately, “After a certain age, all affairs are serious. Like heart attacks.” Lurie, even in his disgrace, even as he only explains his guilt, is able to remind us of the caste system of love. Aren’t the old, the untouchables of love? All this eventually leads to the novel’s most devastating lines, “On trial for his way of life. For unnatural acts, for broadcasting old seed, tired seed, seed that does not quicken…. If the old men hog the young women, what will be the future of the species?”

Lurie says that he is guilty, that he should be punished, and he refuses to defend himself in front of the disciplinary committee, but a daughter is a different kind of force. He yields when she nudges him, “Even if you are what you say, a moral dinosaur, there is a curiosity to hear the dinosaur speak,” she says. And the moral dinosaur tells her his defence. “My case rests on the rights of desire. On the god who makes even the small birds quiver.” He tells her about the time when she was a little girl and their neighbours had a dog. Every time the dog got a whiff of a bitch it went crazy and its owners beat the animal, beat it for having desires: “…the poor dog had begun to hate its own nature”.

This is the defence of men, of all men who have strayed, who say they could not control themselves. Can the world have an argument against it? Contempt and repulsion, yes. And that is how Lurie wins—by not trying to win, by pointing out that in a world that reveres all theories around “hunter-gatherer” instincts, around biology, there can be no argument against men like him, there can only be contempt. And contempt he has in abundance for himself.

The certainty that novels like Disgrace will not be celebrated in today’s world gives writers who are drawn to such subjects two simple options. They may flee to safer stories. Or, they can choose the option of courage. You need more courage to go against the elites of your own profession than to tweet moralistic rebukes to heads of state.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

@ manujosephsan





Nirav Modi and the myth of the path to success


2018-02-24

A few months ago, GQ magazine tried to understand the extraordinary success of the jeweller Nirav Modi. Was he “a marketing genius”, or “a master diamantaire” who knew how to extract work from talented craftsmen, or a capitalist romantic who wanted to rebel against tradition and “make a billion-dollar point”? The article did not ponder other options. It praised his “imperious, ballsy core” and his “razor-sharp PR strategy”. In 2016, a short profile on CNBC.com attributed his success to “a passion for diamonds and an understanding of luxury”. The profile conveyed that he was self-made, a coveted label that implies innate brilliance. He was quoted in the profile as saying that he “never borrowed from family”.

Now we know where he borrowed from—several banks, reportedly collecting thousands of crores in alleged collusion with executives from a public sector bank who broke the rules to help him. He was a player in a corrupt system, and now faces serious charges.

Until a few weeks ago, a vast number of small and aspiring entrepreneurs saw in his life and words, as they normally do see in the lives of billionaires, a path to material success. But in the telling of his story, in the analysis of his success, what he omitted was a fact he must have known—that he was committing a fraud, or a technical fraud. It was an important omission. Even if we consider the possibility that he is “a marketing genius” and that he had a deep “understanding of luxury”, the fact is that his extraordinary and swift success over the past decade was built on some shady dealings. The real message was that you have to game the system to be a very rich person in India. If you do not know how, or if you do not have “the ballsy core” for it, you are nurturing a wrong aspiration. We do not know if this message is true. We only know that in the case of several disgraced rich people, it has been true.

This is the sort of detail that is usually omitted from inspirational stories—an unflattering or a nefarious truth that is usually so crucial to the success of the inspirational figure that every other factor is trivial. What if the truth is that every analysis of success in the world contains such crucial omissions? What if corruption, or even luck, is not merely a contributor to success but more fundamental than that? What if success is often a consequence of unspoken or inglorious or even unknown and mysterious causes? What if the publicly shared reasons for material success are, in reality, inconsequential? This means the notion of The Path is an illusion, and the entire aspiration market has been fed only the placebo of inspiration. The podcasts, books and interviews that explain the success of the successful might be precious as journalism, as knowledge, but even as broad guides to how to achieve your own success, they may never help you in the objective. This may explain the simple fact that most businesses fail, most people do not succeed by the measure of their own ambitions. The notion that a path to success exists makes those who fail believe that they chose the wrong paths.

It is impossible to prove that all success stories in general omit the real causes of success because the concealment is revealed to us only in some cases, for instance when the carefully spun public story begins to crumble. But there are broad indicators all around us.

The start-up fever, for instance, that is spreading to the youth in the lower-middle classes has its origins in the fables that have emerged from the higher classes. In talks and journalistic interviews, a type of young entrepreneur has created the myth that they found investors because they are bright, risk-taking innovators. What is never announced is that the start-up culture in India favours upper-class youth, who do not, in reality, take substantial risks because they will not exactly starve if they fail. Also, they are in the same social club as the venture capitalists, which makes things easier. This lottery of class is never talked about when people explain the success of a few entrepreneurs to millions who wish to make something of their own lives.

The lottery of class as a prerequisite for success is a common feature in many fields. Fashion, for example. A few years ago, when I attended a fashion week, I saw many “economically disadvantaged” students from Mumbai’s chawls flocking the venue. They told me that they aspired to be fashion designers. They were fascinated by the talks and designer presentations. Nobody told them that the primary requirement to succeed in Indian fashion as a designer is to be born into a particular social class. Talent itself, in some arts, is not separate from family background.

Sometimes the central cause of a success story is not concealed deliberately but buried in the slush pile of feeble analysis. For instance, the stupendous success of Chetan Bhagat. It is widely believed in the publishing industry, and among writers, that he succeeded because he had marketed himself. Since his coming, thousands of aspiring and veteran commercial fiction writers around the country have been trying to sell themselves, but with no success. They think Bhagat has shown the path.

I do not believe Chetan Bhagat is a triumph of his own marketing, though he did try. A few years ago, journalist Ankita Mukherji wrote in Open magazine about the time when she worked as an editor for a publishing firm. She had received a manuscript by Bhagat, then an unknown banker. On the first page was a CD, with a clear marketing plan. He would, among other things, buy back copies of his own book and make it a best-seller in the initial weeks, which would then, he reasoned, make other people apart from him buy the book. But she rejected the draft of Five-Point Someone, which went on to become a sensation for a new generation of readers.

Bhagat did not become a best-seller because of his marketing plan. His story was appealing and his language was a relief to millions of Indians. Still, the chief reason he succeeded lay somewhere else—he was from the Indian Institute of Technology. We forget what a novelty it was 14 years ago—to have an IITian write a popular lowbrow story in high-school English (I believe that if he were from BITS Pilani, he would have failed). His initial readership was not only the IITians, as was commonly believed, but the hundreds of thousands who failed to get into the institutes. The reason for his success was, I believe, lost first in journalistic and literary contempt towards his novel, then in the facile glorification of the lowbrow. His success is hard to replicate because it is the consequence of a unique confluence of a man, a story, an overvalued brand and an age.

The idea that a path to success exists, though a myth, is not entirely useless. It makes people draw up plans, and do marvellous things; it collects a generation and gives them a direction. Then most fail, and some succeed for reasons we will never know.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan





Why intuition is greater than debate


2018-03-17

OTHERS : In 1600, the royal British physician William Gilbert explained why the magnetic needle in a compass always faced “north”. It is possible that an ancient Indian said it first, but according to the recorded history of white people, Gilbert was the first to explain the compass. At the time, the popular scientific belief was that the needle was attracted to the North Star or that there was a massive magnetic mountain in the Arctic region. But then an idea occurred to Gilbert—that Earth was probably a giant magnet, and that the opposite poles of the needle and Earth attracted each other. After the idea came his pursuit of proof. He created a model of Earth from lodestone, the magnetic iron ore, and moved a compass over its surface. The needle behaved exactly the way it did over the planet’s surface. This might seem neat but his proof was wrong.

Now we know that Earth’s magnetic field is caused chiefly by the motion of molten iron in the planet’s outer core. Gilbert’s intuition was right; his substantiation of the idea was wrong. In fact, the correct substantiation of his intuition would have been impossible in his time. Around this time, his great contemporary Galileo Galilei was consumed by the sacrilegious idea that the Earth was not the centre of the universe. He said Earth went around the Sun, something that the Vatican, through Pope John Paul II, finally accepted in 1992. Galileo was not the first to propose the heliocentric theory but he had complete faith in the idea at a time when no one had any clinching evidence. Eventually, he found the proof in ocean tides—he said the oceans sloshed around because of Earth’s movement. His intuition about the heliocentric theory was right, his substantiation was wrong. A very common story in the history of science.

An idea comes to some minds as an intuition, to many in the form of faith or imitation, or a convenient corroboration of a bias. An idea always arrives as a realization, spreads as a belief. The arrival of an idea is a religious moment. But its legitimacy is proved in public and private through the fabrication of rational substantiation. An argument then is reverse engineering of a religious moment.

Here I am not referring to collegiate people who can debate either way, or are paid to debate for a cause in television studios. I am only referring to people who have ideas, or at least convictions. Even when they practise it, is debate as intellectually robust and pure as we are trained to assume? Isn’t it true that all debates emerge from the scripture of personal faith? Is the pre-eminence of debate then overrated? In the hierarchy of intellectual activities, why is this method of transmission of an idea more respected than the very force that creates ideas—intuition? An intuition is not a supernatural force—it emerges from dormant or subterranean knowledge. Even so, science celebrates intuition only after it has been proven to be right. Can it be that across the ages, superior thinkers have been subdued by lesser minds who were and are merely good debaters? Is the transmission of truth now entirely in the hands of the articulate, who are better at transmission than truth?

All my life, I have been struck by the facial expressions of a type of people—good minds who are just lousy at debate. They have an idea but they lack the cunning to patch together a substantiation. Even as they lose face, lose the words and go quiet, you can see they have not abandoned their ideas. What they want to say is the most honest but defamed of intellectual statements, “I cannot substantiate this right now, but I believe…”

But then the pre-eminence of debate is unavoidable in some spheres. The soul of science might be the genius of intuition, but, without the process of substantiation and falsification, it would become a comedy, like the “science” of the medieval Catholic church, and the modern lovers of the cow who instinctively “know” that cow dung can block nuclear radiation. Also, science gains immeasurably as much from flawed proofs as from the announcement of beautiful instincts. But the imitation of scientific debate in politics, economics, culture, even literature and other aspects of the subjective arts, is outrageous. In television studios and around dinner tables, people are forced to dress up their intuition or beliefs through the masquerade of logic and evidence. That is a wasteful decorum of modern intellectual life. It will be fascinating if someone organizes a talk series where public figures are invited to talk about their The scientist Richard Feynman said, “Religion is a culture of faith; science is a culture of doubt.” This is the ideal of science but it is not true. At times, science, too, is religion. For all its vaunted objectivity, science itself is in the hold of the powers of faith, which is expressed through highly persuasive arguments. For instance, generations of scientists, who were convinced of the existence of “ether”, which was believed to permeate space, did come up with scientific arguments that were highly respected then.

A new scientific truth does not triumph by convincing its opponents and making them see the light, but rather because its opponents eventually die, and a new generation grows up that is familiar with it,” once wrote the theoretical physicist Max Planck. This, we know, is true in every sphere.

t is the finest thinkers, who first see the vision and then discover the proof, who usually resist new ideas. The same intuitive genius that makes them see things that others don’t blinds them to the intuitions of others. One man’s counter-intuition is so often another man’s plain intuition. Albert Einstein saw what Newton could not see—that space and time are entwined, and that they behave like an elastic fabric, and that gravity is a warping of such a fabric. But despite the great visions Einstein had seen in his life, he disbelieved the exotic science of quantum mechanics, to whose creation he himself had contributed.

When we debate, argue, or even write a column, we build a case, we substantiate our argument and consider opposing views. There is one thing we do not say at all—how we actually got the idea.sually, an idea does not come to us after an argument with ourselves, or after a deep investigation into the facts. This is not how ideas usually arrive, or form. The argument does not create the idea, the idea creates the argument.

ome debates even have petty origins. For instance, many grand debates are inspired by nothing more than malice and jealousy. In the recent past, the economist Jagdish Bhagwati used to challenge the more conscientious Amartya Sen to debates. The motivation was not exactly the welfare of the world. It was more likely that Bhagwati was just miffed that he was yet to win the economics Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan





The ‘intellectual-yet-idiot’ and other ideas


2018-03-24

An evil becomes moral when it gives everyone an equal opportunity to be a part of it. That is why all cunning caste systems have become ladders. People hate castes, but they love climbing. In the new hierarchies of our times, anybody can become a Brahmin, at least in theory. In the face of such freedom, a whole generation is then preoccupied with climbing the ladder. It does not occur to anybody to ask why they must climb, why something is deemed a superior state of mind.

This is the case in the vast caste system of global liberal academia, too, where there are whole hierarchies of clubs, intellectuals, courses and prizes. But now one man has begun to insult the very idea of intellectuality.

If he were an outsider, the establishment would have defamed him as a bitter simpleton and an endearing semi-literate. But then Nassim Nicholas Taleb is a Brahmin among Brahmins. Here is how:

The intellectual establishment has a predilection for the upper class; Taleb, a Lebanese Orthodox Christian, is from that nation’s political and social aristocracy. The establishment has great regard for fancy universities; Taleb is from Wharton, and the University of Paris. The establishment has an unspoken view that mathematics is highbrow; Taleb is a professional and academic mathematician. The establishment finds scientists who can quote poetry very cute and important; Taleb is a scholar of probability, a former quant-trader who used complex mathematical financial tools, and he is said to speak several languages, including dead ones, and often quotes from serious English, French and Graeco-Roman literature. The intellectual establishment has promoted the idea that people who read a lot, especially obscure books, are deep; Taleb claims the establishment itself has not read what he has read.

Taleb is an anomaly that a system creates, an asset that has gone rogue. He is a perfect intellectual who has risen to say that the modern intellectual is vastly inferior to your grandmother. “…people are perfectly entitled to rely on their own ancestral instincts and to listen to their grandmothers who have a better track record than these policymaking goons.” He holds that the transformation of local cultures in the name of modernity, democracy, environment and other virtues is a crime that the “intellectual-yet-idiot” is perpetrating. These are the undercurrents in his latest book, Skin In The Game, which is a brief history of risk, and argues, among other things, that problems occur in a society when influential people do not have to face the consequences of their bad ideas.

Taleb first rose to prominence with his book The Black Swan, which claimed that improbable events have enormous impacts that dwarf everything else, and that certainty is a misunderstanding of incomplete data. The intellectual establishment, which includes the influential news media, rewarded him by declaring him one of the most important thinkers in the world. But over the years it has become evident that he wishes to take down the entire intellectual world, or at least that part which he does not agree with or which has slighted him in some way. He has said repeatedly that professionals like economists, historians and psychologists are frauds. And columnists too. Taleb finds the word “scientist” in “social scientist” hilarious.

He has frequently tweeted that Steven Pinker, the “cognitive psychologist” from Harvard who argued in his book, The Better Angels Of Our Nature, that we are living through the most peaceful period in human history, is an ignoramus, or a fraud, because he has based his arguments on a faulty understand of data and math. “Pinker has about every attribute of the charlatan. Nothing short of a charlatan,” he once tweeted. After the popular American astrophysicist Neil deGrasse Tyson tweeted that if people are willing to accept that science can predict the solar eclipse, they should also accept the scientific predictions of climate change, Taleb tweeted, “This guy is an intellectual fraud,” because it was deceitful to equate the science of predicting the path of a heavenly body with predicting more chaotic phenomena like climate. He has had spats with several popular intellectuals. Also, he has often called The New York Times’ columnists and journalists “imbeciles”. He once insulted The New Yorker magazine: “The opposite of reading is not not reading, but reading something like the @NewYorker.”

For mysterious reasons, the victims of his assaults have not been able to respond to him in powerful ways, or have simply chosen the elegance of silence over what would certainly be an eventful battle. Pinker did defend himself but he was so respectful of Taleb, it seemed like a tribute. Only Sam Harris, a neuroscientist and a popular author and podcaster, whom Taleb once called an “imposter”, has demonstrated the ability to match Taleb’s venom: “This guy is just insufferable. I’ve actually never witnessed a marriage of incompetence and confidence so fully and grotesquely consummated in the mind of a person with a public platform.”

Taleb’s arguments are not always ironclad. For example, his contempt for the science of genetically modified organisms is based chiefly on the argument that we do not know the risk they carry. By that reasoning there should be no mobile phone towers as we do not know the health risks they pose.

The sanctum sanctorum of American media has not reviewed Skin In The Game, yet. The New York Times has completely ignored him, but the book has made it to its Best Sellers list, which carried an incorrect description. Taleb then called them, once again, “imbeciles”, following which the venerated newspaper made a correction. Taleb claims in his book, “Those who use foul language on social networks are sending an expensive signal that they are free—and, ironically, competent.”

His intellectual-yet-idiot appears frequently in the book in various forms, “telling the rest of us 1) what to do, 2) what to eat, 3) how to speak, 4) how to think, and 5) whom to vote for”. He is also the type of person who “studies grammar before speaking a language…”

Within the ambit of action and consequences, Skin In The Game discusses numerous ideas:

That “we are much better at doing than understanding”.

That if we do not take risks for our opinions, we “are nothing”.

That a small number of people in a society can be exceedingly influential—for instance, it doesn’t take a majority to ban a film. And that the state of not being offended is less influential than the state of being offended.

That ethics will always outlive law.

That neighbours get along better than roommates.

That people with no intelligence at all will work well, “under the right market structure”.

That if you have a choice between a surgeon who looks like a good surgeon (Hollywood version), and a surgeon who looks like a butcher, you must choose the guy who looks like the butcher.

And that “courage is the only virtue you cannot fake”. Taleb, evidently, has not met some Indian empathy uncles.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan





About the defamation of male bonding


2018-03-31

In the film Sonu Ke Titu Ki Sweety, two straight young men who share a deep friendship, have to deal with the inevitable intrusion of a beautiful girl. Titu, in the delirium of love, does not think anything will change between him and his best friend, but Sonu knows he will be downgraded, and he begins to plot the downfall of the girl, who is no slouch. As the battle lines are being drawn, she sets out to do what many girls do—reform the fiancé. The reformation hits Sonu hard, as he shares a flat with Titu. She feeds them egg-white omelette and millet, bans meat, and appoints a live-in boy-servant to keep their flat clean and spy on them. Sonu gets him sacked by luring him to watch Bhojpuri porn. The film is an enjoyable farce, but it does raise a question that is not appreciated enough: “What exactly happens to the friendships of men after they get married?”

In the real world, most heterosexual men experience a uniform progression of friendship. When they are boys, friends are abundant and diverse; then they slowly begin to appear similar, and part of a tribe, as most of them are on the same career path. Then girls appear and change many things. As Sweety tells Sonu, with a menacing face, when a man has to choose between a girl and his best friend, “the girl always wins”. After marriage, it is all over for any deep male bonding. A man who is out meeting friends too often, too late, is a delinquent. As Sonu narrates his fate if Titu gets married, “I will meet you once in three months; at birthday parties…”

Several married men have told me of an absurd predicament, that the very fact that they are satisfied in their marriages makes them lonely. There is nothing to seek in people any more. A typical married man, especially if he has children, has lost most of his male friends. And he is usually not allowed girlfriends.

A few days ago, I found on Twitter that the miracle nobody talks about is that “Jesus had 12 close friends in his 30s”. These days, married men meet that many friends, real friends, only during reunions. And, really, there can be nothing more annoying than the reunion of such men: those conformists who did all the right things, all that was expected of them, including siring two children, now valiantly recounting exaggerated stories of modest adventure when they were in college, all of which their wives have heard a number of times.

Most things that are dear to men are deemed nefarious or unhealthy or an addiction. Some are obvious, like porn. The attack on adult males loving their male friends is more subtle and presented as a form of moral rebuke for selfish behaviour. In my youth, a Parsi girl told me that Parsi men are predisposed to spending more time with their male friends than their wives, which was in fact her great fear in marrying a Parsi. I have heard the same about Bengali men from Bengali women. And my mother has said the same about Malayali men, and I can confirm she was right. Modern married men face a stigma that is attached to spending too much time with their friends. It is shameful to be their fathers; to be the way men were a generation before them.

But there are defiant men who refuse to be domesticated, who seek the company of other men. Even I used to have some kind of a contempt for such men when I first found love and could not bear to see a circle of male journalists in the Press Club, drinking, licking pickles; men with thin legs who spoke of how exactly Brazil could improve its football; men suddenly breaking into song.

Now I feel that I should have looked at those habitual late-night drinkers with more sympathy. They were just middle-aged men who did not wish to lose their friends, who chose to sit with buddies at the end of every day instead of going back to their families.There is a view in society that there is something unhealthy about this.

In theory, we have a high regard for the idea of friendship. It is the only relationship that is not defined by the state. It is a relationship, of our choosing, something we do not have to be stuck in. Every other kind of relationship strives to become friendship as though being “a friend” is a higher state—parents want to be friends with their children (mothers who tell their daughters, “I am not your friend, I am your mother,” probably mean, “I’ve hacked into your Snapchat”). Even spouses say that they are “friends”, when they mean that they have upgraded themselves. Everybody wants to be friends, everybody wants friends. In practice, however, family men especially have to choose to be feral to keep their friends.

In Sonu Ke Titu Ki Sweety , two men are afraid that they will lose each other to the great powers that women wield over them. It is an unusually tender expression, which often uses the trick of self-deprecatory humour. But even in its farcical form it is part of a fascinating trend—men are learning from women to articulate their wounds without being distracted by the hierarchy of the wounds. The articulation of problems, after all, is in line with our self-absorbed times. More of this will enter our mainstream arts, and they will not be using the ruse of humour. And those who are terrified by human whining, will have to seek refuge in safe niches.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.He tweets at @manujosephsan





How to defeat a rogue nation? Find a bigger thug


2018-04-14

One stormy night, when Sujatha Gidla was a little girl, the head of a snake appeared under the door of her home. There was just the snake’s head, the rest of its body had been consumed by some animal. The head, as she remembers, slithered across the floor, leaving a trail of blood. On another day, some boys spun tops on her head, drilling holes in her scalp. On another day, an adolescent neighbour showed her his erect penis and she thought the swelling must hurt him, the reason why he was asking her to massage it.

These are, by the standards of her childhood, the unremarkable parts of her life. For she was a Dalit girl, and almost every day was surreal as India tried to convince her that she was not only a civilizational outcast but probably a different species.

In her youth, she joined a band of Communists. Not the type who eat salad, but those malnourished types who eat bananas and walk on thinning rubber slippers and dream of overthrowing the Indian state. Even though she did not do anything criminal, she was arrested and beaten in police custody with sticks and ropes, and pins were stuck into her nails. In return for all this, India asked her for love. But then some Indians can see clearly that patriotism, like morality, ethics, values and decorum, is nothing more than the leash of the upper castes to control the rest.

Gidla, though, was actually fortunate. “My family is the top 2% of the untouchables,” she told me when I was in conversation with her at the Jaipur Literature Festival in January. Her parents were graduates and even though they were poor, their education offered her a slim chance. She joined the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, as a research assistant, and, later, about 18 years ago, when she was 26, she fled to the US.

Her memoir, which is a private history of a Dalit family, was published last year. Ants Among Elephants does not bother to pay the mandatory obeisance to B.R. Ambedkar. The hero is her uncle, K.G. Satyamurthy, who once wished to overthrow the Indian state through armed struggle, and co-founded the People’s War Group. He somehow escaped unnatural and torturous death, and died an old man, of natural causes, in 2012. There was the light of political genius in him and those who saw it early were women. In an extraordinary scene in Gidla’s account of his youth, a beautiful Christian upper-caste girl who was smitten by him drew him to her house when nobody was around but she made him come in through the back door because he was “an untouchable”.

Ants Among Elephants pushes the grand historic events to the backdrop, and shows the lives and minds of the wretched. A man battered by thugs walks bleeding to a shop, buys a soda and slowly lights a cigarette; a husband invites his wife, very fondly, to sit on the bed with him and asks if they must commit suicide to escape debt; a band of Communists who march somewhere to liberate the poor are interrupted by a landlord who complains that among them is his slave, whom he wants back for the day’s work (and the Communists give the slave back); a malnourished Andhra Dalit girl’s blood freezes, breath stops and brain goes “numb” when she watches a Malayalam film in which all the rich and the upper-caste are Christian and the poor underdogs are Brahmin; a humanitarian activist who keeps lamenting the rape of women because it excites him; a Dalit man whose great hope is to liberate a prostitute and marry her.

But through it all, Gidla shows what actually matters when your nation is incompetent, and society, cruel—family. As she tells this story, we see a way of life that most of us know nothing about. She shows, for instance, how important the pig is to a Dalit wedding feast, how on its final day it is chased by naked youth until it falls down exhausted (slaughter will waste blood); and how the pig is so fattened, its neck so thick, it never sees the sky in its life until its final moment, when it is strung to be roasted. And finally, about the historic Dalit love for pig’s meat, she says, “the cheapest meat for the cheapest man on earth”.

How does the “cheapest man” defeat his rogue nation? By finding a bigger thug than his nation.

That is the meaning of Gidla’s flight to the US—to a bigger syndicate than the Indian state. And that is the meaning of every Dalit conversion to Christianity, and romance with communism and revolution—a quest for a force that can stare India down.

The West is such a force but none of the domestic movements could destroy India from within. The armed Communist movements, for instance, were doomed because most of the cadre comprised just regular folks with no criminality in them. In a scene in Ants Among Elephants, a band of new Naxalites barges into a rich man’s house and asks for keys to the safe. The man absurdly claims he has forgotten where he has kept it. A child in the house begins to cry and a bandit scoops up the baby to comfort it. “Shhh, shhh. This class war is not against you.” Seeing this moment of weakness, the household raises cries for help; the neighbours arrive, but the Naxalites persuade them to go bring something to break open the safe. The neighbours then arrive with axes and spades. It has to be among the most confused burglaries of all time.

The Dalit war against India is not always about winning. Most days, India is unbeatable. So, often it is about losing gracefully.

India wins like oppressors win. Through co-option. It dug the hole, put some people there, then, many centuries later, placed a ladder. The thing about the social ladder is that it is usually placed by the same force that dug the hole.

The only liberation for the victims then is through the imitation of their oppressors in areas where the upper classes hold all the cards. Gidla herself imitated the intellectual aspirations of the upper castes and became yet another Indian who was something in “IT” in the US. But then, she told me, she did not have “the caste networks” to survive too long. “I didn’t fit into IT because it was filled with upper-caste Indians,” she said. And in the lay-offs of 2009, she lost her job. “At that point, I became a conductor (in the New York subway system).” She found the idea of a working-class job romantic and true to her Marxist ideals.

India’s Dalit anti-nationalism started the moment Indian nationalism began to form. Many intelligent Dalits did not see why they must be part of the freedom struggle, when it was from Hindus that they needed freedom. “If we drive the white devil out, the Hindu devils will massacre us,” says an ancestor of Gidla in her book. But in the end, Jawaharlal Nehru’s Congress co-opted them all. Eventually, when they were disappointed by free India, they were co-opted by Russia. “Because it is the country for all the poor people in the world,” a man says in the book.

Many years later, when Indian Communist intellectuals had a dispute, the two factions would go all the way to Russia to ask Joseph Stalin to resolve it (which he did, according to them). And for all their hatred of the upper castes, Gidla points out that the great romantic aspiration of Dalit men of a time was to marry the orphaned Brahmin girls who were once abandoned on the doorsteps of Christian missionaries.

But there has been no greater force of co-option than the myth of formal education. Generations of Dalits saw in it a way to escape poverty, but they were also, inescapably, toeing the line. After Gidla’s mother, Manjula, graduated, she went to the home of her teacher, a Brahmin. She did not even attempt to enter his house for he would not have let her in. She stood outside on the road and thanked him. “Sir, without you pushing me hard…” Manjula’s personality, as captured by her daughter, is the story of the brightest Dalits India has ever produced—“she coupled rebellion with obeisance”.

But the most powerful way in which India co-opted the Dalits was to make them racist themselves. There are scores of sub-castes within the Dalit community and the top castes among them treat the lowest of the low, the scavengers, for instance, the way the upper castes treat the Dalits. The movements that were meant to liberate the Dalits themselves practised caste. The Naxalites and the Maoists and other armed wings of the Communist movement did not hand over guns to “the untouchables”, but brooms. “…When members were recruited, they were assigned duties according to their caste. Barber-caste members were told to shave their comrades’s chins, and washer-caste members to wash their comrades’ clothes. Untouchables, of course, were made to sweep and mop the floors and clean the lavatories.”

What patriots do not realize is that it is easier to be a nationalist than an anti-national, even for a Dalit. It is very confusing to fight India. India is at once kind and cruel, its politics is at once the revenge of the poor and the oligarchy of the rich.

Even so, Gidla shows no affection for India. “This is the place that shaped my personality but…that’s about it,” she told me. But then she did manage to educate herself and escape. India must have done something right.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan





Why we should have higher standards for the good


2018-04-28

One day Muslims and Dalits and small farmers and gypsy girls and everyone else in India who needs protection may want to know why they lose. And it may occur to them that they lose because their guardians are doomed to lose, and they may want to know who exactly their guardians, who are numerous, are. They may then see, or most probably they may not see, the true nature of their guardians: Well-meaning men who are in politics not because they are the fittest to survive, but because they have been genetically ordained to enter politics; conscientious lawyers who are always saying the right things on TV to people who already know the right things; that middle-aged guy who after failing in all his material ambitions now sits with a glass of whisky every night and tweets what is good journalism and what is not; that pious young writer who is into “long form only”, who is exactly like the Kung Fu Panda—innately lazy but eager to learn from foreign masters; and those activists who recently made over 50,000 farmers march 200km to Mumbai in the hot sun for, as it now transpires, nothing really beyond the appreciation of the middle class of Mumbai, who were so impressed by the fact that the farmers made an effort to prevent traffic jams; and that Mumbai comedian with modest talents who makes fun of “the bad guys” because it is easy; an urbane rural affairs activist who has been lamenting the plight of small farmers for decades without ever wondering that if he has been saying the same things for decades then he, too, has been completely useless to the farmers; and the scores of people who might feel it is they I am talking about because they are all the same really.

The miseries of India are not only the triumph of evil, but also the failure of those who claim to stand for all things good. So it is futile to lament evil alone. We must ask a question that is never asked of the good. Are the mediocre good as dangerous as competent evil? Is it enough for “the good” to be virtuous, or should they also be smart and hard-working and talented enough to win, and to win often, especially win elections? Are the current crop of “the good folks” deserving of the attention they receive or are they only beneficiaries of their social networks? What if the fact is that public attention is finite and zero-sum, what if the attention on the privileged or posturing “good folks” is attention lost on more competent reformers, who may have a far better shot at the polls?

The regular people, the consumers of news, activism and revolutions, tend to have no standards for the good. As long as people have good intentions, or they claim to stand for the right values, we reward them with respect, attention and money. This even though the hell of modern India is not the creation of any single diabolic man but the team effort of people with very good intentions.

In a society that has no standards for the good, the activists who will rise to public attention will be those who have influential friends in the media, the type of people who can survive for decades using the subjectivity of lament activism. They do not contest elections or allow themselves to be measured objectively in any way. They do not face any serious consequences for failing to meet their own objectives. Such a cesspool of the good attracts many whose claim to goodness is chiefly that they are not evil people. It is a bit like that Captcha statement, “I’m not a robot.” You need to just tick the box. Not surprising then that the contemporary fellowship of good folks is primed to make a noise, and to posture, but not to win.

We should raise the bar not only for career activists and journalists and lawyers, assuming there is a difference, but also for ourselves. On what basis do we grant ourselves that warm cosy feeling of goodness? What is it that we actually do to deserve it? We have compassion only for the kind of poor who do not threaten us—like farmers marching in the night so as to ensure the smooth flow of cars. This is actually a feudal emotion that masquerades as compassion. Also, we have begun to articulate noble thoughts but this is largely pointless. The articulation of good intent only saves us from the requirement of actually doing something. Also, Indians who lament inequality are precisely those who send their children to attend expensive courses in the US. Not for a moment am I suggesting that we should not admire meek, innocuous and, not to forget, “organic” farmers; or that we should take the trouble of doing difficult right things instead of just articulating sweet ethical things; or sending our youth abroad to give them an unfair head start. I am saying we should do all this stuff but we must stop claiming to be patrons of goodness. If we deny ourselves some easy masks, we will work hard to gain face, we will find ways to do what is more difficult than just posturing. That is why I sacked myself as a good person, and I will persuade you to do so, too. And that is exactly why atheists usually do more good than believers—because they have no recourse to supernatural rituals to claim to be good and have to instead perform duties in the real world.

That the lucky should take care of the unlucky is the greatest human invention. It is too important for us to have a low bar for the guardians of the weak or even for the rest of us who claim to be good. We must sack the mediocre good. NextMAds

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan





Watching ‘Avengers: Infinity War’ with a nine-year-old


2018-05-12

Darling, everything is as usual. An unhappy attendant gives us our 3D goggles, which means we will soon witness yet another immensely enjoyable lame fiction on IMAX where good will defeat evil after some tense twists. Surely your circle of nine-year-olds was exaggerating a bit when they said “it will be impossible not to cry in the end”. How grim can Marvel Studios be?

Five minutes into Avengers: Infinity War, maybe you cannot see it yet but I have to accept that something is not quite normal. It is not just that the arch-villain Thanos is already extremely powerful because villains usually are at the start of a story. What is odd is the absence of dignity in the heroes. In the first 5 minutes, Thor screams as Thanos tortures him, that too with one hand. He looks baffled and helpless. Loki, who is related to Thor in some form that I don’t understand, is squished and killed by Thanos. Hulk is thrashed and would have been killed had not a dying hero beamed him away. Other minor superheroes die.

I can feel all the joy in you vanish. I want to say “this is only a film” but I know that would be a foolish thing to say. Also, you will then say about that part of life which is not a movie, “This is only real.” There is no argument against that.

The thing is, I can see that the writers love Thanos more than they love the heroes. Writers do usually love the darker guys. Thanos is serious, majestic, deeply unhappy and he has a glorious purpose. He believes that the problem with life in all the worlds in the universe is that there is too much of it and very little of what they need to survive. So he seeks the six Infinity Stones that will give him the power to destroy half of all life in the universe. It will not be a genocide because genocide discriminates. What Thanos wishes for is just random halving of populations. Thanos may not have heard of a man called Thomas Malthus who once said the number of people grows when things are good, which soon results in so many people that things are not so good any more, but Thanos is driven by the same view. Actually, most people who wish “to control the population” too are talking about the same thing even though they may not wish to massacre the living, rather they would like to deny life to the unborn. Strictly speaking, Thanos is slightly fairer than a former chief economist of the World Bank called Lawrence H. Summers who once signed a memo in 1991 that said toxic waste from factories should be moved from the US to poorer countries because the value of life is cheaper in poor countries. When the letter got leaked, Summers said he was only joking. Maybe it was just a joke but I know you don’t trust people who are hurtful first and then say they were only joking. Also, you are right, “a joke has be funny”.

I like the fact that Thanos loves his daughter, Gamora, the green alien, who was blue in Avatar, and that Thanos insults her boyfriend, by just enunciating the word “boyfriend”, or maybe you didn’t find it as funny as I did. Somehow I like the fact that Peter Quill says his relationship with Gamora is too deep for him to be called a “boyfriend”. But then soon everything begins to turn grim. You finally press my shoulder to ask, “Is this a sad movie?”

Of course not, I say. Avengers is too expensive to be sad. That is the price every successful story pays—it is doomed to be naïve and happy in the end. A superhero movie is a lot like Indians doing something—everything will go wrong but “in the end” it will all work out. Yes, there is a lot of death and violence. That is how a story tries to be unpredictable these days—through deaths. Otherwise, it is hard to beat the viewer. We know too many stories, we know what is going to happen most of the time. Every story, after all, is the sum total of all stories ever told. Storytellers have to find ways to surprise us.

But, towards the end, when I suspect that some heroes will die, I want to whisper to you some advice—“Never be a minor superhero franchise in life.” But then, as Thanos wins all the Infinity Stones and with a click of his fingers dooms half of all life in the universe to turn into ash, and half of the avengers and their allies collapse into dust, among them are the big ones too. Dr Strange dies, Black Panther goes. But what breaks your heart is when 15-year-old Spider-Man clings to Iron Man and cries, “I don’t feel so good Mr Stark” and “I don’t want to go, please, I don’t want to go Mr Stark. I am sorry, Tony, I am sorry”.

Now we wait for the resurrection and justice. We have seen too many movies not to wait for the turn that will bring back all that is lost. But then the film ends. Half the universe is dead, and evil has won. That is it.

There is stunned silence in the theatre. The few who rise to leave receive cold stares of hatred from those who sit in mourning—we need to show more respect to the departed. There is funereal stillness in the hall. Adolescents weep. A teenaged girl, who is sobbing, is held by both her parents. Are you amused at the fall of the teenagers? After all, your arch-villain is The Teenager. Just a few hours ago, a teenager had scolded you in school, “Shut up and eat your f-wording food.”

“What a bad movie,” you say. “What a bad movie.” Outside the hall I see a teenager weep and I chuckle. You glare at me. “That is rude.” You fight back your own tears but they now flow.

There is no way this story can end like this. These days the end is never the end. There is always a sequel, you know that. Marvel has already announced the sequel. Only they and Dr Strange know how it is going to end. But I think we can guess—all the superheroes, at least the big ones, will rise from the dead. Have faith in capitalism. There is sorrow only in art.

Yet, I accept, the statements from the boss of Marvel Studios, Kevin Feige, are very disturbing. He has hinted that some of the deaths of the big superheroes might be permanent. The directors, Anthony and Joe Russo, too have said disturbing things: “The audience can tell you they love chocolate ice cream, but if you give it to them every day, they’re going to get sick of it real fast. You’ve got to stay ahead of them….

“You have to go to very difficult places for the stakes to feel real, for the characters to feel like they have something to lose, for the audience to feel like they have something at risk.”

But if you wish to believe me more than them, which is unlikely, I think almost all the superheroes, especially Dr Strange, Black Panther and SpiderMan, are coming back. Apart from the trap of popularity and commercial success, a story is doomed by another factor—the good have to win in the end, that is the con in every successful story, there is no escaping that. That is the demand from everyone, including you, and that is what the storytellers will supply.

What is going to happen in the next Avengers is that there will be some time-travel trick or alternate reality.

“If you travel at the speed of light, it will change time,” you say. “But that is so obviously not true. Nothing can change time.”

The dead Avengers will return and whatever path they take, it is going to be lame, and a form of cheating. The sequel is already doomed. That is the price the storytellers have paid for telling a great, bold story.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan





In Madras, it was always summer


2018-05-19

At the time, when we were 16, I did not know he was schizophrenic; I thought he was very close to enlightenment. We spoke a lot about why Indians were more likely than other races to see the absolute truth. He had a theory that white people were least likely to achieve nirvana unless they roamed the tropics—because they wore too many clothes. The cold of the West, he said, made them wear so many layers of garments that they became self-absorbed in style, and as a result materialistic, while Indians were trained to be austere because the weather did not require them to think too much about clothes.

For some reason, we divided cultures into weather—chiefly, hot and cold. I do not recall why we presumed that all nations had uniform and unchanging weather when that was not true even for the northern part of our own nation. We were familiar with the idea of seasons—as something that happened to other people because in Madras (now Chennai) it was always summer. That tired joke about the three seasons of Madras—“hot, hotter, hottest”—was weird because we all knew it, yet we told each other that. Somehow we did not know how to apply the knowledge of seasons to the real world, especially when we made deep conjectures about other cultures. Maybe we thought cold cultures were only “cold, colder coldest”. In the world that we knew, nothing ever changed in the course of a mere year—the vegetables and the fruits were the same, and so was the way people dressed. In fact, there was this scorn for people who changed the way they dressed, or changed anything at all about themselves, which was perceived as phoney behaviour. It is possible that a tropical town, accustomed to perennial sights, had an exaggerated respect for consistency.

In the time I spent in Madras, the first two decades of my life, from the mid-1970s till the mid-1990s, the idea of escaping the weather was not important to most of the middle class, nor was it economically possible. Our rooms and public transport were not air-conditioned. Until the age of 17, I was not acquainted with a single person who owned an air conditioner. We sweated and smelled (of jaggery, I thought). Brides sweated, grooms sweated; teachers, students, lovers, priests, thieves and heroes—everyone had a film or a patch of sweat. In response, we were bare most of the time. I read Midnight’s Children and P.G. Wodehouse, and learnt to solve the cryptic crossword bare-chested, some days in a lungi—and that did seem like a cultural anachronism. But the idea of dressing up for an occasion somehow involved wearing foolish clothes. Most Kanjeevaram silk saris are a glasshouse. Almost every Tamil film had songs in which the hero wore jackets. Ordinary men, too, wore sweaters because they thought they looked good in them. For a while, every time I wished to dress well, for romantic reasons, I would wear a black turtleneck—in 40 degrees Celsius heat and 100% humidity. The dandies who attended church in sunglasses, too, wore two layers of garments and they suspected they looked so dashing that they would puff one cheek in embarrassment.

But there was such a thing as summer. It was a time that was hot even for us. People quit wearing sweaters, though at least one boy wore a black turtleneck on some days. The air was so heavy with moisture that it was as though no breeze could blow it away. Life was hot and still and in the evenings there was a great lethargic gloom in our hearts. Water would cease to flow in the pipes and even the middle class had to call for tankers, which were manned by the sidekicks of bottom-rung politicians, all of whom had a special summer swag, as though the class hierarchies had collapsed and they alone owned a vital resource. Middle-executive men and their wives, children and servants stood on the roadside with buckets. As adolescent boys, we were used as mules by parents and neighbours. I mark that time through the visual of an unfailing behavioural mechanism of boys trotting with two large vessels of water and throwing glances at the balconies above for girls whose purpose, we assumed, was to look on with admiration.

In the summers, some good fathers would take their families to Ooty for a few days but mostly people went to temple towns that were hotter than Madras. It was also a time when strange rustic grandparents visited Madras and our colony saw apparitions that reminded me of communal scenes in Star Wars. My own grandparents were the most conspicuous. The enduring image of them is of the bare-chested old man from Kerala walking down the cricket pitch with a jackfruit on his shoulder and his tiny old woman strutting about in an ancient white costume that included a fan-like object behind her. At first I was embarrassed, but then they were so unusual I paraded them with pride.

But mostly we had nothing to do in the summers. We would sit on the walls for hours wondering what to do. And we stared like villagers at any passing sight. As a teenager trapped in Madras’s insufferable summers, I began to go on long aimless walks across the city—in the peak heat of day and in the dead of night. I walked miles every day. The world appears to have forgotten that a walk can be pointless, that it is not something that is invoked only to reach a destination, or to pamper the heart after eating rubbish. The intense boredom of summers gave me one lasting gift—an important part of my life today, as it was then, is walking for no reason at all. I used to walk great distances at midnight too, returning from films I watched alone. I almost never paid for the tickets because I would enter the hall after intermission, when no one checked. Madras at indecent hours was a strange place filled with men who had a dark desperation on their faces. One night I discovered that a bus went around the city carrying prostitutes and picking up men from designated spots. I used to be stopped by policemen who wanted to know what I was about. I would pretend that I did not know Tamil and speak to them in English and they would lose interest in me. It was all so simple.

Almost everything from that time has changed. Now the posh young people of Madras do not look grotesque when they wish to dress up. They wear very little. And it is easy to abolish the city’s heat. The middle class does not sweat or smell of jaggery. The weather at a given point in time in a room is like them, a global monoculture.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets @manujosephsan





How the defamation of GMOs was achieved


2018-05-26

About twenty-two years ago, Mark Lynas did not know what “DNA” stood for but he was still enraged by the new science of genetic engineering. Around this time, when he first heard the word Monsanto, he thought it had an evil ring to it, as though Satan himself had started the company. Scientists were saying that genetically modified crops can survive weeds, diseases and even natural calamity, and they can be more nutritious and cheaper than conventional crops, and they will need far less pesticides. But Lynas, who lived in Britain, saw evil in people like scientists and corporate executives, who were far more successful than him. He was a volunteer for the multinational activist organization Greenpeace. Even though his knowledge of genetics was rudimentary, he began to write alarmist articles about human beings in a lab altering the genetic structure of plant species (“These are dangerous times ahead…“). He wrote press releases for Greenpeace, and articles in the news media that quoted the press releases he himself had written.

To put it very simply, Lynas was among the key activists who created and contributed to the fear that would become the global hysteria against genetically modified organisms (GMOs). If you are someone who hates GMOs but cannot hold a conversation beyond 30 seconds on the subject, you are in the sway of what Lynas and his friends began to do about two decades ago.

One day he tried to steal the first cloned animal, Dolly the sheep, but the plan failed because Dolly was with other sheep and they all looked alike. There were more successful operations—one night he and his friends slunk into a trial field of lush genetically modified corn, and he hacked down plants. Another day, he threw a cheap supermarket sponge cake at Bjørn Lomborg, author of The Skeptical Environmentalist, a popular book that questioned the many assumptions of environmentalists.

For this act of facile self-righteousness, Lynas became popular among people with “inner beauty”, but something about his humiliation of Lomborg bothered him, and eventually led to a startling event in 2013. At the Oxford Farming Conference where a few senior ministers were among the speakers, and Prince Charles, too, through a video uplink, Lynas began his speech by recanting his stand on GMOs, and apologizing for destroying their image. “I am also sorry that I helped to start the anti-GM movement back in the mid 1990s…. As an environmentalist, and someone who believes that everyone in this world has a right to healthy and nutritious diet of their choosing, I could not have chosen a more counter-productive path. I now regret it completely.”

His book, Seeds Of Science, which released a few weeks ago, is about how activists like him used ignorant ideals and deceit to achieve the successful defamation of GMOs.

When he threw the sponge cake, he did not know why Lomborg was wrong; only that he was. It was a matter of faith. Lynas began to study scientific material to seek evidence that supported his convictions regarding the environment and appeared to find it. The process of studying scientific literature made him realize that he actually enjoyed seeking knowledge to support his blind faith. But when he began to search for evidence that GMOs were poison, he was confused. He realized that there was no concrete scientific evidence. In time, he began to see that it was a wronged science. Of course, some of his former friends and thousands in the anti-GMO camp had a different view—that his soul had been bought over by Monsanto.

As a defence of GMOs, Seeds Of Science does not have any new startling facts. His arguments are widely known, and, in fact, not disputed even by scientists who are suspicious of GMOs: When humans began to domesticate plants and animals thousands of years ago, they began to genetically modify life. Every grain and vegetable and fruit we consume today has been altered from its wild ancestors. In fact, we will not be able to consume the “real” banana. “Changing genes via laboratory molecular techniques, the main subject of this book, is not much different from conventional selective breeding,” Lynas writes.

In the early 1970s, the formative years of the science of laboratory genetic engineering, the first concerns were not raised by activists, but by scientists. They said that we did not have a grasp on the effects of GMOs on nature, and on humans. In 1981, James Watson, the co-discoverer of the DNA double helix, said, “Might some of the new genetic combinations that we would create in the test-tube rise up like the genie from Aladdin’s lamp and multiply without control, eventually replacing preexisting plants and animals…?” Such scientific concerns were not very different from the fears surrounding nuclear technology, or the more recent fears about radiation from cellphone towers, and the colliders where high-energy particles are smashed to see what comes out of the collision. Eventually, the scientific community began to accept that there was reasonable evidence to suggest GMOs were safe for humans and for earth’s natural vegetation, and everything that depended on it. Watson himself was assured. “My position is that I don’t read recombinant DNA as a major or plausible pubic health hazard….” But activists stayed with the fear because they are in the business of fear.

In 2012, the American Association for the Advancement of Science board issued a statement: “The science is quite clear: crop improvement by the modern molecular techniques of biotechnology is safe.” In mid-2016, in an extraordinary letter that was eventually signed by 131 Nobel laureates, or one-third of all living laureates (more than 100 of them had won the Nobel for sciences), said the propaganda against GMOs by organizations like Greenpeace is “a crime against humanity”. The triumph of activism is that these days scientists cannot profess love for science without attributing it to some grand noble cause. Not surprising, then, that the Nobel laureates had special interest in a theoretical but plausible type of GMO rice that would spawn beta-carotene, a hydrocarbon that is a progenitor of vitamin A, a crucial nutrient hundreds of millions among the world’s poor are deficient in because of their inefficient grain diet.

But nothing scientists can say can abolish the fear that activists have seeded across the world, including the myth that GMOs are carcinogenic. Activists have, as Lynas shows in his book, continued to terrify people by saying that the crops will give them cancer, and that everyone who is supportive of GMOs has been bought over by Monsanto. Across the world, the educated middle class is generally against GMOs. The fear is primarily a belief that pretends to have a scientific explanation.

It is the good fortune of mobile technology and the Large Hadron Collider that activists did not find the right circumstances to create influential movements against them. Actually, in its early days, they could have got the cellphone banned on the premise that we do not know the effect of radiation emanating from cellphone towers. Also, there were people who worried that the Large Hadron Collider could reduce Earth to a black hole, but somehow they didn’t escalate the alarm.

Once people form an opinion, especially when the opinion becomes publicly professed hatred, it is almost impossible to get them to change. That is why I feel most evangelical writing is pointless. The success of prose today lies in confirming the biases of people, not in changing them.

What the successful defamation of GMOs should teach us is that ultimately the battle is never between truth and lies, or science and religion, but always between storytellers. A powerful story is always about you. Activists often tell good stories because they talk about how you will be affected, which is more influential than how you will not be affected. Scientists get caught in facts and concepts, and they should learn an important lesson from the cesspool of activism—never try to tell a popular story without first creating a villain.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan





Heritage is what we do not have to preserve


2018-06-16

The true nature of Thiruvananthapuram is that it is a narrow lane. It has a few broad roads, of course, but their heart is not in being broad. They let vehicles and people flank them, slowing down life so that people can have a good look at other people. Most spaces in the town behave like narrow lanes. In a narrow lane, people stare at what they have always seen, and, when they see something new, they need to do something more than just stare; so they stare with an opinion.

On a given early morning on the clean winding lanes of this town, an impossibly old woman may pick flowers from her own tree, serious men may go somewhere in their white mundu; and young girls, as always, look as though it has just rained. There is much street joy in this town, which is a sprawl of low-roofed homes in a forest of coconut trees. Thiruvananthapuram looks like the past of an Indian city. And when you realize suddenly that all this will go one day, you may get a familiar ache. Isn’t it inevitable? All this beauty and quiet will be replaced by tall lean apartment buildings with a triangle or sphere on top, as though to suggest architect Hafeez Contractor had thought of it.

We are trained to believe that such a longing for the survival of what is cultural, beautiful and aesthetic in a city is noble; that it is humane to be disgusted by real estate developers who transform old into new. But then is it true? Is the pain we feel for the mortality of heritage as virtuous as it seems at first glance? What is the price regular people pay to keep a city centre beautiful? Are they outpriced, have they been cordoned off in faraway uglier places from where they have to emerge to work in beautiful places? Is the urban antiquity of a city a symptom that the cultural elite have held their forts, that they have not been toppled by modernity? Does the fact that the old money of Thiruvananthapuram still lives in its heart, holding large swathes of commercially valuable land, mean that the economy is not advanced enough to create a new class of elite? Isn’t it true that the charm of this adorable town is also a sign that it is a difficult place for businesses to thrive?

Progress is not aesthetic because aesthetics is not the objective of progress, no matter what the beneficiaries of aesthetics may say.

But then it is hard for the lovers of heritage to let go. The destruction of what is old, hence beautiful, reminds us of our own decay and mortality, and, for this and for many other reasons, we will find ways to protest or even preserve the old structures and cultures. That is why every time an Irani restaurant in Mumbai sells out to become McDonald’s or KFC, a type of people mourn the transformation. They curse the power of capitalism even though an Irani restaurant, too, is a symbol of capitalism, old and cute but still capitalism, which had once destroyed an even more ancient way of life.

There is something farcical about heritage conservation, about ancient beautiful buildings whose modernity is hidden within. All things considered, is it not true that the real heritage of a place is not in what the municipality controls, but in what survives in its people? The enduring heritage of a place is in manners and ways of standing and types of humour and exquisite proverbs, and marriage vows, and also in gods, and, of course, high-carb food.

The real heritage of a place is not what people feel should be preserved but what its people do not feel the need to preserve because it is almost eternal.

In Thiruvananthapuram, there is paradisiacal food, and art is not what people who cannot do science do, and people know their rights. Barring 2 hours of peak traffic every day, most vehicles follow rules as though they have ceded from India. At the traffic signal, they stand behind white lines, they let people cross the road, and though you may find it hard to believe, it is true that on occasion they even leave a whole lane free for stray cars that want to turn right. And they do not honk. This, too, is heritage.

There is probably a point in the per capita income and the human development index of a society when its people will suddenly decide to stop behind the white line at the signals. And the fact that Thiruvananthapuram has gone past that point, and that despite its backward economy its human development index is almost First World, is a consequence of its heritage. This, in turn, was created by the region’s early capitalistic prosperity, which combined with religious morality to promote the theory that all humans have equal rights, which eventually led to powerful social and political movements, and universal education and health.

The real destruction of Thiruvananthapuram will not be the razing of beautiful homes and a million coconut trees, but when all its people stop thinking in Malayalam and begin to be ashamed of who they really are. In any case, when there is a battle between heritage and human nature, heritage usually loses.

There is a hugely enjoyable way of perceiving heritage which is similar to a very common philosophy of enjoying life—accept mortality and fully extract every moment through all the senses. Like the value of life is in its transience, the value of urban heritage too is in the inevitability of its disappearance. Immortality is the end of meaning. As you walk down the moist narrow winding lanes of Thiruvananthapuram, as you feel the pain of a future when all this will not be around, you can feel the fortune of being right here in the gentle drizzle among these cordial homes.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous. To read more of his columns, go to livemint.com/moderntimes

He tweets at @manujosephsan





How is good news actually transmitted?


2018-06-30

One morning in January, Amish Tripathi gave me a lift. The writer whose fiction has sold a few million copies told me, “There are three kinds of readers.” I am usually never with people who say, “There are three kinds of readers,” so I grew very alert. “The first kind are those who read over 50 books a year.” He meant “50” in a metaphorical way; he meant readers who read a lot of books. “They form a minuscule proportion of readers,” he said. “The people who read your novels are probably among them.” The second kind of readers, he said, “read one, or maybe five books a year. My readers are among them.” And the third category, he said, “read one book in their lifetime”. Honour, according to him, is to write that only book hundreds of thousands of Indians will ever read in their lives. I was struck by a thought at that instant. He had, inadvertently, explained the mystery of word-of-mouth. When people say something to their friends about a book, a film, a restaurant or even a political idea, what decides how far their words will go? How is good news transmitted?

In our analysis of word-of-mouth, we usually consider who is talking, and how many of them, and even where they are talking from. We imagine a hierarchy of influencers with highly sophisticated or powerful people in urban centres on top, their words flowing down the social order. Is this the only way positive news can be transmitted? There is an aspect we usually do not consider that might be important. In word-of-mouth, what is the tone of the word? Is there a hierarchy of tones, too, in the order of influence, and who is capable of the most influential tone?

People who read “more than 50 books” do talk a lot about books—but also about a lot of books. It is rare for them to speak ecstatically about a single book, especially a new release or an Indian novel, even if they loved it. People who read “one book a year”, or less than five a year, speak with more passion about books. They may say that they do not read as many books as they wish to because they do not have the time but we know that is nonsense—we always have time for what we want, and to those who love reading, the act is so fundamental that they find the time. So the fact is this category is not addicted to reading, or has not been converted to the powerful overstated notion (promoted by writers, of course, among others) that reading is some great virtuous human activity, or they do not have the power of concentration, and, as a result, find it hard to read. So when they do finish a book, it is because there is something in it that has made them transcend their resistance to reading, and they are, as a result, blown away by the book or by their own effort. They speak for weeks about the astonishing book, the way people speak of a discovery, and they speak very simply and very well to others like them, who constitute a majority of the literate population. They are more useful to the books they love than most widely read people.

Now, imagine the person who has read only one book in his life. He will be nothing short of evangelical when he speaks of that only book he could complete.

Word-of-mouth, very simply, is the great favour done by the naïve, by which I mean the fresh, the young, the good-natured optimists, the inexperienced, the new, the amateur.

You will never hear much about long-distance running from an African runner who finishes the marathon in under 130 minutes. As this column had once argued, it’s the plodding amateurs in the infancy of old age who go on and on about it. And it is not a coincidence that most people who speak about spirituality and meditation are agonized souls that have never known quiet. And it should not surprise us that the amount most women talk and read about sex is disproportionate to their actual sexual appetite in relation to men.

The initial success of the Anna Hazare movement was a direct consequence of a politically naïve Indian urban middle class overestimating what was just another street demonstration. Note that Hazare did not move the middle classes of Kerala and West Bengal, places where that class was very familiar with political engagement.

There are, of course, several forces that push an idea out into the world. There is the establishment using its many channels to transmit works that conform to its idea of excellence. There is the chaos of unpredictable events, there is the bias of the audience, there is dumb luck. But among the most important and underrated is the collective chatter of the naïve in the enigma of new discoveries. It appears that in some situations we transmit farthest when we are not the core target group of that which is being transmitted.

The first time I read a work of non-fiction, I was about 14, and the book was the autobiography of Pelé. I confused book for genre and celebrated the book for inventing autobiography. What I was struck by was not just a book, but a whole product line. I talked about it for days. Later, when I read Cosmos by Carl Sagan, I went around town explaining the universe to many people. I was about 17 when I read Midnight’s Children by Salman Rushdie. It was the first time I was reading a book which informed me that reading a story can be hard work, and it was the first time I was encountering magic in a serious story that had long words, like “tintinnabulations”, and it was the first time I was reading a writer who was a famous political victim. It was the first time I felt important while reading a book, and I was its greatest ambassador in Chennai for years to come. Recently, when I re-read the novel, I could not recognize the book I so loved.

I spoke best about books when I was young and naïve. Now, when I talk of books, I make most of them sound unremarkable, which they may not be.

The struggles of art, or what is considered art, like the “literary novel” and “arthouse movie”, and its existence at the mercy of the establishment is not because the world is dumb, as artists wish to claim. Art often fails to reach out to the most efficient transmitters of good news—the naïve.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous. He tweets at @manujosephsan





What lovers must steal from the free speech movement


2018-07-14

On how they must be, lovers tend to derive from other lovers. That is why they are often miserable. There has to be a better idea for the blind than to follow the blind. They do derive a lot from literature too, which they would not if they actually met the writers who have said the most beautiful things about love. In fact, lovers should learn to be better lovers in places where no one tells them they should look—some of our grandest political and economic ideas.

Democracy teaches us that the best idea, which is yours, may not be as influential as the second best idea because the second best idea is everyone’s second best idea. Despotism teaches us that it works as long as you are making money. Marxism has always tried to tell us that a conflict is not an anomaly but often what we call life; and that the resolution of a conflict is not more important than the conflict itself.

But what offers the most useful practical lessons—not just for romantic lovers but also parents and children and siblings—is freedom of speech. As we know, it is a principle, upheld by more Beautiful People in Delhi than is believable, that we should not harm anyone for speaking his mind. Some comedians confuse free speech with offence. They go on to defame the idea of being offended. If we believe in or love anything at all, it is inevitable that we will be offended. We need to have faith in free speech not only when we need it but also for the times when we are offended. Free speech is not merely a right but also a duty. And that is what lovers should accept. There will be times when they are offended by the most important people in their lives. Full stop. So how should they respond?

Many years ago, after Aishwarya Rai announced the end of her relationship with Salman Khan in the form of a press release that she faxed to many publications, accusing him of “verbal, physical and emotional” abuse, I spoke to several people who were close to both the stars to write a magazine story about their tumultuous love. One person told me that Rai used to punish Khan through silences; he was unaccustomed to that form of punishment, and it drove him crazy. At the time, I was about 27, and I did not understand why mere silence should drive someone crazy—in fact, if your girlfriend wishes to be nasty and offers silence, that should be a relief. Some readers too wondered why any person must overreact to silence; but many readers understood the silent treatment as a potent punishment. All lovers punish but the reasons and methods vary, as does the impact on the targets of the punishment too. Some lovers give a long rope before they choose to inflict punitive measures; some have a low threshold and they punish even if there are no great transgressions of the kind Rai claimed to have endured. Lovers punish their lovers for statements, behaviour, mannerism, inaction, and the fear of such punishment may greatly influence the nature of the relationship.

When the price for speaking up is high, people shut up. This is what happens at the political, social and religious and corporate levels in all societies, and this is exactly what happens between lovers too—everything in love is out of proportion but when the punishment is disproportionate to the offence, it does exactly what an authoritarian state does to its citizens, artists and salaried journalists—people begin to curb their own expression. And when people in love do not have the freedom to say what they want to say or do what they wish to, they will fall out of love just to find that freedom. Love, like a mature democracy, must work towards lowering the price one has to pay for offending.

But it appears that many lovers are a lot like India—they grant free speech in theory because they wish to be principled, but not in practice. Actually, many lovers behave a lot like China.

Like all important ideas, the advantages of free speech too can be explained without morality. In fact, the doom of romantic authoritarianism can be explained by two popular ideas that are dear to economics and business—the law of diminishing returns, and the competency trap. Extracting a high cost from a lover for an offence, while profitable in the beginning, will increasingly yield less as its potency wears off through repetition. Also, people who are highly successful in getting the relationship they want by meting out tactical punishments do not find the need to develop peacetime strategies that might be more essential as the circumstances of the couple change with age.

But all this does not mean that people can go around stating whatever they wish to their lovers and expect tolerance. There have been times when I have seen men use the ruse of humour to insult their wives. But then isn’t the freedom to express malice an important part of free speech? Isn’t most of nasty humour and art actually a form of aggression? There could be an argument that cartoonists should be allowed to insult and hurt whomever they wish to, but I don’t think this form of free speech makes any sense to love because the objective of love is not freedom. Happiness maybe, but not freedom. Political free speech has to be complete and universal—worthy of both Galieleo and homeopathy. The free speech of lovers cannot be absolute.

In any case, there is no point in telling people in relationships, as they glow in the full powers they have over others, how to be better people. People often do not lose love after a valiant battle. In the end, people throw love away for no good reason.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan





Will the umbrella never evolve?


2018-07-21

I was in Kerala when the monsoon made landfall, and I was reminded of a few things about rain that I had

forgotten because I live in Gurugram these days.

One morning near Kochi, during a dry spell, as I stood in a roofless white fortress, the daylight faded in seconds and it began to rain. The guide, who was saying something about the place, did not stop talking. And he didn’t quit even as he unfurled a floral umbrella and held it above us. A married couple beside us stood under another umbrella, which performed its most important social function—to create the optical illusion that a couple under the canopy are in tender love. As for keeping us dry, the two umbrellas were useless.

The rain grew heavier and it pounded the earth, but the guide continued to narrate history. At that moment he was a lot like Kerala, which is, unlike Delhi, designed to go on and on in the rains. We were now soaking wet below the knees and the dampness was beginning to work its way up. The guide, who was still talking, said, “I will now tell you a joke,” which was when the lady beneath the other umbrella finally said, “No.” There was no shelter in the fortress, which I know sounds like a line from a sentimental collegiate poem, but there really was no place to hide. We decided to walk back to our boat, about a kilometre away. As we walked, it began to rain harder still and the breeze blew the pretty umbrellas out of shape, as they normally do. We decided to get more protection, so we walked under the umbrellas to buy more umbrellas. But the new larger sturdy umbrellas did not help much and the umbrellas themselves were now contributing to our bath as water dripped from them and the drips were blown by the breeze.

It was highly enjoyable but the umbrellas were, like the day they were invented probably 5,000 years ago, mostly useless. We continued to get wet—with one hand’s movements lost to holding a dripping stick. There has to be a good reason why there has not been a serious design change to the umbrella. According to historians, even the foldable umbrella was around in ancient times, and in any case the foldable umbrella on a windy day in Kerala is of the same order of idiocy as the flat dinner plate or a teacup with small finger holes.

Is the umbrella, then, a perfect technology that cannot be improved?

About nine monsoons ago, I wrote a column on the same topic, but chiefly about how in a world where the lifespan of most technology is brief, the umbrella reminds us that an obsolete thing can still endure.

Already then, hundreds of innovators were applying for umbrella patents to the US Patent and Trademark office. There was even an application for a flying umbrella. I also read about a Chinese man who had invented an umbrella that was only as big as a regular umbrella’s handle, which would send out powerful jets of air to keep the rain away (maybe the man had not seen the rains of Kerala. Also, what about the sun?). But these innovations have failed to hit the market. In any case, these innovations failed to hit the market. I now see that the US patent office register has applications for “a privacy umbrella” whose canopy will use “a one-way material”; a “mister umbrella” that will cool the user’s head with mist; an umbrella with gills that will ensure the canopy will not fold in strong winds; and “an advertisement umbrella” that will transmit ads on the canopy.

As we can see, even if these umbrellas enter social life, they will not constitute an evolution of the umbrella. The fact is that the most respectable, popular, mainstream umbrellas are still conceptually close to the one our ancestors knew, thousands of years ago.

So what qualities must the perfect futuristic umbrella possess? It should keep Malayalis and others dry, that’s all.

We can argue that the umbrella has in fact evolved and changed so much that this writer is unable to see its modern avatar.

Isn’t it true after all that the phone diary, business-card holders and even the camera have evolved—and they are all inside the phone? So what if the umbrella has evolved and it is actually a car? There might be substance in this argument in, say, Delhi, where the moment people can afford a vehicle they do not walk any more to reach a place, but in regions like Kerala, and Mumbai, where walking is a smart form of transportation, the argument that the modern vehicle is the new umbrella fails.

When we say “evolution”, we borrow an idea from biological life, but our instinctive understanding of evolution is very different from life’s method. When we talk about evolution, we mean something that is better, but that is not how life evolves. Life evolves chiefly through accidents that align with other accidents of environment and a transformation thrives. A life form can evolve into something physical or intellectually inferior if the conditions help.

The reason why the umbrella has failed to “evolve” in machine terms is very simply that we have not been able to make it “better” for the mass market. I used to think books are such a perfect technology that they could not be improved on. But then the e-book is a serious evolution which has transformed not only the way we read but also the way we buy books. For now, the physical book and its mutant coexist, and I think they will for decades. The physical book is such a formidable technology that it will endure. The umbrella, too, even if its mutant rises, will coexist with the avatar.

In a way, that is what has happened to the umbrella in Gurugram. It coexists with an evolved corporate human who does not walk to be transported any more. That is odd, though, because in Gurugram the rains are so humble that even an umbrella can keep one dry.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets @manujosephsan.





Why the streets of Amsterdam are so joyful


2018-07-28

People having fun are like cattle; they almost never look up. But at times someone tries to drink the last drop from the glass and that makes them look up and it is then that they see me. A brown guy framed by a massive window in an ancient home staring down at them, and they are generally so happy they find this, too, amusing.

There has been no respite from happiness. At this very moment too, as I write these words, I can hear a roar of laughter. That is because I am in the heart of Amsterdam and it is evening. If you come to its famous cobbled square, Spui, you will see a row of red and brown homes that were built a few centuries ago, which lean a bit forward. In one of those buildings, on the third floor is the window where you will see me staring at you, and at the roaring, chattering crowds drinking below in the cafés. It is like this every evening. Different people every day but they remarkably sound the same and there will always be one guy with a deep valedictory guffaw, and one woman with a piercing incredulous scream. Maybe she is only pretending to enjoy some guy’s joke, who knows. From my window I can also see the entrance of a “Coffee Shop”, which in Amsterdam means a place where you can buy cannabis. About 50m away, you can also buy magic mushrooms.

The fun on my street begins every day long before the daylight starts to fade, which is around 10pm, and the carnival goes on till 3am, less than 2 hours before the daylight returns, when the seagulls come to peck at the litter of the fun, with a loud squabbling screeches that make pigeons sound reasonable.

I am here on the invitation of the Dutch Foundation for Literature to lock myself up in a hermitage in a flat above Spui. When I arrived I was working on an argument that people find it hard to be happy, especially those with no real problems, because happiness is not a right as we have been told all these years. We make a mess of happiness because happiness is in reality a duty, a duty to enjoy our own simple good luck but it is hard to stay with this thought in Amsterdam where, at least on first glance, everyone appears to perform his duty to be happy.

In the city, a curious exhibition is underway. On display are human body parts, most of them genuine parts sourced from cadavers, of course. The theme of the exhibition is the popular but disputed view that happiness contributes to health. The exhibition shows what lifestyle does to some of our important organs. The moral of the show is that we should be happy. This is among the fringe shows in the city where there are spectacular events all through the year, and of course, the Van Gogh and Rembrandt House museums, and the Rijksmuseum, and the house where Anne Frank lived and wrote her diary.

As in many great European cities, there is much street joy in Amsterdam, a current of fun we do not see in India, the republic which is against fun. Generations of godmen have claimed that Indians have a monopoly over joy, a claim that has attracted millions of lost white people to us, but we know that our streets have somehow never belonged to the happy. Sitting by this very window in Amsterdam I read that Goa’s chief minister Manohar Parrikar, having returned from death, has announced that he will fine anyone caught drinking in public in his state. In Amsterdam, too, there are such laws but in practice people spill out of bars, into the sidewalks, on the roads.

It has been a good summer in Amsterdam. The long days are dry, and they are stunned by sunlight. I have bought a second-hand cycle. There are 400km of bike lanes in Amsterdam, but as an Indian, I don’t always stay on the lanes. Actually, by the standards of white people, the Dutch are not that orderly on the roads.

The deepest street joys in Amsterdam are not in its raucous evenings but in its silent mornings. In how the blue trams vanish down the bends. In the glorious women in short dresses cycling somewhere; lovers kissing for so long as though one of them is going to depart in a train forever, but then when they finally stop kissing, they continue to walk. Men sit in narrow lanes and look carefully at women and pass comments. In the red light district, women stand behind windows, some of them gorgeous beyond subjectivity, as great hordes pass them by. Men of all ages stare with incredulity at the certainty that, just for €50, they can sleep with a very beautiful woman, or at the certainty that they can escape so easily the casteism of love that favours the successful over the losers; just open a door, that is it. There is more joy though in the large parks of the city where people wallow in families and domesticated men cycle with two children, their hair flailing, in a cart attached to their cycles. In the many canals of the city, tourists go in boats gawking at the ancient buildings that flank the waterways. Hitler chose not to destroy Amsterdam probably because at the time it was not so important to destroy it. So most of its past, across centuries, still stands.

Is so much happiness, and richness, in plain sight vulgar? Especially for the unhappy and the unfortunate. To be a loser, or to be physically or socially defeated, in such places is more painful than being so in India, where the fallen have the companionship of the majority.

I tell a Dutch interviewer that from an Indian’s point of view, Amsterdam is so outwardly joyous that I feel I am inside the Facebook page of a whole town. As a native of Amsterdam, she is not so sure though that the Dutch are happy. Many locals tell me that. One fiction editor told me with a chuckle, “As you go north of Amsterdam, the suicide rate shoots up.”

Once you tire of the city, the best thing to do is cycle to the rural areas, maybe to Twiske, which is a pastoral place by the woods. In the Netherlands you can walk alone in the wilderness confident that you are on the top of the food chain. That is what is, finally, Christian about the region. All animals are subordinate to the human, and so the great beasts have been long destroyed. And if you tire of the joys too, and want to see some domestic trauma, just keep a close watch on families on vacation—they never disappoint.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous. Read his previous columns at livemint.com/moderntimes

He tweets @manujosephsan





‘Jugaad’, India’s most overrated idea


2018-08-18

How can you not like him? He used to sell an insurance policy to Mumbai’s train commuters who wished to travel ticketless. For a small premium, he insured them from the consequences of being caught by ticket checkers. He is among the delinquent Indians I have only heard of and never met, but I do wish he exists.

This fable is in the class of endearing stories about vernacular, and usually rustic, Indians with almost no resources doing smart things, often by breaking the law. There is an unspoken surprise in the perception of such fables by journalists and academics—that poor Indians can be so smart. Collectively, this smartness is known as jugaad in north India. It includes the insufferable stories of the dabbawalas of Mumbai, who collect and deliver lunch boxes with precision, and an enterprising Sikh man who uses a washing machine to make lassi.

In the past decade, a halo has been bestowed on jugaad by the confluent attention of Indian English-media journalists who usually convert their incomprehension of provincial stories into hefty sociological concepts; foreign correspondents who then “understand” India through such concepts and promote them; academics who then quote the respectable global media to extrapolate more than their understanding allows; and the respectable media who then quote academics to corroborate the sociological concepts that they helped create in the first place. That is how jugaad became “the Indian way of innovation” that management gurus advised the West to emulate. A form of law-breaking and street smartness in the face of poverty and governmental incompetence was elevated into a management principle.

A book that was published when jugaad was at the height of global respect, in 2012, is a good example of how the over-intellectualization of a simple Indian way of life created a bogus philosophy. Jugaad Innovation: Think Frugal, Be Flexible, Generate Breakthrough Growth is actually a meta-jugaad.

Written by Navi Radjou and Simone Ahuja, who are consultants, and Jaideep Prabhu, who is an academic, the work is a jugaad book about jugaad which tries to create something out of nothing. The book begins with a blunder. It quotes Albert Einstein as saying, “Any intelligent fool can make things bigger, more complex, and more violent. It takes a touch of genius—and a lot of courage to move in the opposite direction.” In reality, it is a quote by the economist E.F. Schumacher. This moment of mediocrity is a portent of what is to follow. After the quote, the book immediately begins to express awe at how one remarkable Indian has found a way to use clay pots to keep water cool, a compliment that may amuse Indians who actually live here. The book then profiles the man whose true achievement is that he has marketed the ancient clay pot as a terracotta “fridge” that didn’t need electricity. The authors call this jugaad, and go on to extol global corporations to think small, like rural Indians. They then start calling Benjamin Franklin’s experiments jugaad, and it is then clear that they are confused about their very premise.

Like many urbane fans of jugaad, the authors wished to abolish from the idea of jugaad all that is illegal and unethical because such gurus cannot be seen as endorsing something that breaks laws and morals. But then jugaad is not merely the smartness of an individual, or even that thing which absolute conformists in suits keep parroting—“thinking out of the box”. Because how can India, or any other civilization, have a monopoly over these? Jugaad is “frugal innovation”, the authors say, and their central premise is that giant corporations should learn from poor Indians. But then why should we ask giant corporations with giant profits to be frugal about their most useful role in society—innovation? Also, a poor Indian has good reasons to be frugal; why should a giant corporation be so?

Jugaad is often exactly that mangled thing which has lent the idea its name—the illegal, dumb, dangerous vehicle, a poor man’s Transformer, built from the parts of other vehicles, and irrigation pumps. If, over 150 years after the invention of the internal combustion engine, modern Indians are using this as a form of public transport, then there is nothing to rejoice in the fact, or for more advanced societies to learn from. Jugaad, the vehicle, is a consequence of many problems, chiefly India’s failure to provide safe and affordable public travel to millions of villagers. And jugaad, as a method of innovation, is evidence of similar problems. The awe of some Western academics for this inferior form of innovation is similar to the awe of very happy Scandinavians who overrate Bhutan’s Third World contentment.

Also, the whole point of jugaad is that it is no big deal. Any culture can assemble scrap and make a bad car. Any culture can put a door on a clay pot and call it a fridge. The existence of jugaad is merely the evidence that the circumstances of a society are so bad that its smart people are doing what smart people in other civilizations do not have to do.

There is an argument that such humble innovations can solve problems no one else but the poor want to solve. But then India holds enduring proof that giant capitalistic market forces that throw up accidental solutions are more beneficial to the poor than jugaad, or humble altruistic research. For instance, Media Lab Asia, the pious short-lived collaboration between MIT Media Lab and the Indian government, worked on a range of technology to improve the lives of the poor. For nearly 10 years, I followed the work of researchers on the cheap computer, cheap phone and also on proto-Artificial Intelligence that will translate languages.

In the end, the problems were solved by BlackBerry, Apple and Google, giant corporations that thought big and believed in having extravagant budgets for innovation.

That is why the real jugaad is not Jugaad; it is Tesla.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets @manujosephsan





The art of losing to parents


2018-08-25

Every decade or so, some topics leave our conversations forever. Things we used to say, used to hear lovers and friends say in our 20s, we never hear them anymore. We do not hear them even in public places because when it comes to important matters, even Indians speak softly. What I almost never hear anymore is friends telling me how bad their parents were, how terrible, or at least how disappointing.

No so long ago, when peers dropped their guards, the subject of the rogue parent would come up often. A young woman would tell me how, when she was a little girl, her mother developed a mysterious and vicious rivalry with her for the attention of her father, who was away in Africa. Another girl told me that she hated her father deeply for marrying a second time—after her mother died of cancer—even though her fondest memories of the man was him caring for his dying wife, washing her and grooming her and talking to her for hours in monologues. Many young men from Kerala would mutter the defining contempt for their fathers who came home drunk every night, in fury or quoting Shakespeare. And the Tambrahm boys would tell a familiar story—about strict fathers who asked them, when they scored only 98% in maths, where the 2% went. “I did everything my parents wanted me to do,” was a common complaint.

I was indifferent to the problems of men because my own relationship with my father was Greek-epic grade. The problems of women were alien, hence interesting.

Those days I said two things to comfort unhappy friends, which strangely made them even more gloomy. To those tormented by delinquent parents, I said, “Life is meaningless, so all this doesn’t matter”, which was my go-to thought but it never worked its magic on anyone else. To those whose demons were in their own heads, I said, “You are lucky, you are your own problem.” This was usually received poorly. When I said, “you are your own problem”, I meant every problem that was not caused by parents, which included disappointing lovers and toxic offices. It might seem unreasonable to most people but those who spent their childhood and youth dealing with a parent gone astray will understand the good fortune of having to only deal with yourself.

A young man would recount a night, when he was 19, when he finally punched his inebriated father. The boy was stunned by how easily a grown man could collapse. As the man lay unconscious and bleeding, the boy stitched up the gash on his father’s forehead with a needle and thread his mother gave him. Even though he had hoped for several years to thrash his father, it was the saddest night in the boy’s life.

Many did not fully understand the consequences of getting even with parents, because they hadn’t yet. Those days, when people used to tell me the stories of their parents, I got the sense that they were developing muscles, muscles that will not grow on their bodies but on some spectral future self, special muscles that alone can subdue their giant looming parents during a final climactic battle of their lives.

But then I have not heard from them about how it all went. They do not talk as much about their parents as they used to because their parents have aged and they ceased to be formidable, ceased to be the arch villains in the lives of their children. People in their 40s have giant children and dwarf parents. That is how it ends.

Parents lose easy. They age, and then they die.

My peers who faced serious, though not criminal, injustices from their parents have learned that you eventually never get even with family.

They had lived their youth wishing for justice, for their parents to be punished, but not explicitly. Their confusion was largely unnecessary, for when justice does come, in the form of time, disease, dying and death, the children do not feel they have won. The fall of parents, in the eyes of most people who are not psychotic, does not feel like triumph; it feels like you must press their feet.

Some friends did not wait for time and the spectral muscles to retaliate. Like the 19-year-old who punched his father, they gave it back to their parents when they were still very young, but the act of retribution killed something in them. A girl whose father had insulted her boyfriend, deeply hurting the delicate boy, dragged her proud father to the boyfriend’s house and forced him to apologize. But, in time, she so regretted her action against her father, a type of man who used to clean the eyelashes of his daughters with deft strokes of a matchstick, it destroyed her idea of romantic love. Boys, in her view, were not worth it, they were simply no match for a father.

When I was an adolescent in Chennai in the 1990s, I witnessed a much darker form of self-destructive retaliation against parents—when children killed themselves to punish their parents. I feel such cases have reduced in number, or maybe it is just that this is among those things I don’t hear anymore.

There is an Indian social fable about parents, that they are made of milk and honey. It is as though the act of producing a child somehow turns people into something venerable. Twelve years ago, around the time of the release of Lage Raho Munna Bhai, Sanjay Dutt, who has no good reasons to be righteous about anything, finally found his moral virtue—in several interviews around the time, he commented that there is so much abandonment of parents in India. He said he loved his parents. This is not surprising because they were useful parents and it is improbable that he would be the star he was without them.

Wallowing in his goodness, as a son who loved his influential parents, he abused Indians who neglected their old. Dutt had found someone he was better than—the son who treated his parents poorly. The Indian state itself has made parental neglect a punishable crime. For people who had to endure bad parents, this might seem sanctimonious, but there is wisdom in caring even for the villainous old. Because the idea that the strong should take care of the weak is our best idea and everything that we call civilization flows from that.

But there will be no “closure”, as my peers once hoped, because it is one of those nonsensical words the Western civilization has made famous. In matters between people, there will be no closure, there can be no closure. We are always in the middle of things, and that is how we will leave—in the middle of things. Life has no neat balance sheets. Some get away with more than the rest. And that is alright.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets @manujosephsan





Tequila ‘chaas’ and patriotic ‘chaat’


2018-09-07

In any city outside the subcontinent, when I pass by an Indian restaurant and see Indians inside, I feel we will not get along, even if they are not social activists. To me they look like villagers who hold on to home and tradition, from which all dangerous ideas come. So, when it is my own time to run to the lap of Indian food, I walk into the restaurant sheepishly, maybe with mild shame for being enticed by mere food, and with unnecessary discretion, as though I am about to do something illicit. This is unreasonable because I know it is instinctive for most Indians, after a period of time in Western civilization—the length of time decided by an individual’s capacity for being a cultural orphan—to rush to a place called Taj Mahal or some such thing to relish even fake Indian food over authentic foreign cuisine.

I didn’t need any cultural justification a few weeks ago, though, when I walked into Indian Accent in London, a highly regarded fine-dining restaurant. It was work. The Lounge editor had asked me to eat there and meet chef Manish Mehrotra, who was visiting the city for two weeks to change the menu.

Like most chefs, he is an amiable man who is mildly amused when you appear to have dietary restrictions, suspiciously with a fitness motive. After telling him that I don’t eat red meat, and I thought his eyes said “imbecile”, I couldn’t find the courage to tell him that for the frivolous reason of living beyond 100, I (usually) choose to avoid any grains, or the type of sugar that is called sugar, or milk. In any case, a good look at the chef lured me to be decadent for an afternoon.

The first thing I ordered was a cocktail that I would have thought not possible—tequila in a common Tamil drink, which the restaurant correctly calls neer more and is generally wrongly termed buttermilk (it is diluted yogurt). Even in the interpretation of the drink, the restaurant does not use buttermilk on the menu and that, on a scale of authenticity, is of an order higher than the common Indian English novel. Neer More—Mustard Tequila, Fresh Yogurt, Kummel is what the menu says, and that is what it is.

A long trail of tasters follows, like chaat and green pea bhel, and Kolhapuri chicken and soy keema. All familiar, yet different. Like Hollywood’s humanoid aliens.

Indian Accent’s salad version of Kolhapuri Chicken. Courtesy: Indian Accent

When, at the end of it all, Mehrotra finally arrives to have a chat, he says he doesn’t try to achieve “authenticity” because after a point authenticity seems ridiculous. There is such a thing as “original”, though, and “fake”. Most curries in London restaurants, he says, are fake Indian food. There is such a thing as authentic mayonnaise, he says, but not authentic Indian food. “The ancient French have put things on record, on how to make mayonnaise. You can say this is sacred to many people. There is no Indian food that has a sacred recipe. We don’t do stuff like that. But there is a certain soul to Indian food.” The soul, he says, is in the assembly of ingredients, from where they come, the process and the reasons, though forgotten, why things are the way they are.

Mehrotra lays out what his ultimate goal is, which is also the objective, he says, of several top Indian global chefs—to give Indian food the global respect it deserves. “We are not just curry and naan. And we are the land of spices, not chillies. There is a difference. And masala chai doesn’t mean adding masala powder to chai. And Indians don’t have mango lassi with their dinner. And what is mango lassi anyway? Also, what is this vindaloo? Who eats vindaloo in India? And Indian food is not something that is meant to make you bloat and go off to sleep. Also, India is not north India. There is south India, which has the best breakfast in the world.”

He is, naturally, an endearing man to a South Indian even though at one point when he comments on the hundreds of types of sambhar, he recognizes sugary dal, the Gujarati-influenced abomination in Mumbai’s fake Udupi restaurants, as sambhar.

Mehrotra says that the perception of what exactly is “Indian food” is changing in London. “Now people know what Bangaldeshi Indian food is, and what Indian Indian food is. Maybe not in the interiors of the UK. Maybe not in Glasgow. But in London, there is an awareness. People know the difference between curry houses and restaurants like us. But even other high-end restaurants like Gymkhana still have to carry some curry. But not in my restaurant.”

It will be a mistake to read too much into tequila chaas, but the cocktail, and everything that followed, do have something to say about the contemporary meaning of the term “global” in an age where people disenchanted with capitalism are claiming that globalization is nothing but the local culture of a colonizer. But what Mehrotra points out and shows through his food is that the modern global is not the triumph of a single culture, it simply cannot be. Rather, the modern global is a confederation of tweaked local cultures. Capitalism, as a good restaurant demonstrates, has no choice but to respect diversity, while it is sanctimonious idealism that is the true monoculture of our times. The new global, it appears, is the profitable cosmopolitization of the local. The Londoners see in his food something deeply familiar to them, yet foreign. Like the “Asian literature” they are supplied by resident South Asians.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets @manujosephsan





The beautiful evil of Yuval Noah Harari


2018-09-15

In Monty Python’s film, Life Of Brian, when a large crowd imagines Brian to be their promised saviour, he tells them, “You don’t need to follow anybody. You’ve got to think for yourselves. You are all individuals.”

And the crowd chants, “Yes, we are all individuals.”

Brian screams, “You are all different.”

“Yes we are all different,” the crowd chants.

The popular historian Yuval Noah Harari mentions the scene in his latest book, which contains “21 Lessons”, in a remarkable coincidence, “For The 21st Century”, to suggest that people are herds with delusions of individuality. As we know, intellectuals who lament the “echo chambers” of our times are echo chambers themselves.

Plebeians, scholars, nationalists and humanists alike surrender their intelligence to collective opinion; the liberals, though, are more likely than the others to chant that they are individualistic. The infestation of uniform ideas in the gangs of our world also creates noble justifications to support those ideas. That is why there is no substantial group on Earth that believes that it is evil; yet there is so much evil. Evil, it appears, has long assumed more respectable names.

“The problem with evil,” Harari writes, “ is that in real life, it is not necessarily ugly. It can look very beautiful.”

Harari states this to show how impressive patriotism appears to patriots even as it wields the power to destroy millions of lives. But all the lessons he tries to impart have this unspoken warning—evil thrives because it is not as obvious and unreasonable as Lord Voldemort, but by being something complex and endearing, like religion, identity, pride and technology. And not so long ago, communism and socialism.

This leads to a disturbing question, which Harari does not ask. What are the beautiful things around us today where great evil lurks that good people are unable to see? What if the campaign against capitalism is in reality a campaign against the poor? What if the urban encouragement of rural Naxals is in reality the hiring of cheap martyrs? What if most of activism is an unconscious elite battle for their own privileges? And what if there is a deep dark negativity in “progressive movements” that will lure the mentally ill and eventually ask them to destroy themselves for a glorious cause.

Harari has unromantic views about the “groupthink” of the compassionate urbane, widely known as liberals. He never explicitly includes them as one of our beautiful evils but does identify “liberalism” as one of the three great stories the global elites spun in the 20th century to describe mankind. The other two fables were, “the fascist story” and “the communist story”. Alpha fascists gave way to romantic communists who, like romantic men, made promises that were not as good as their poetry. Only liberal capitalism was left standing towards the close of the century. “The supermarket proved to be far stronger than the Gulag,” Harari writes. But today with the rise of democratically elected alphas, he points out, none of the three stories stand and the scholars, including Harari, are confused. It is in the nature of humanities professors to first create thought-experiments to describe humans, then imagine that the thought-experiments are truth, and eventually get confused when they are proved wrong. Societies have always been a mixture of enterprise and compassion, modernity and tradition.

But the future, Harari writes, might look more like what Karl Marx imagined than Steven Spielberg. Even those who have not read a word of Karl Marx, which might be most of the literates actually, will instinctively know a Marxist future is something unhappy. But evil lurks in the happy story of technology.

To draw our attention to the impending darkness, Harari mentions a chess contest that was held in December last year. One of the contenders was known to chess players around the world. Stockfish, believed to be the world’s most powerful chess engine, is a computer program that has been designed to analyse chess moves. No human has a chance to beat it. Stockfish played AlphaZero, Google’s machine-learning program. The two programs played a hundred games.

AlphaZero won 28, drew 72 and lost none. The programmers of AlphaZero had not taught it chess; it learned on its own—in 4 hours.

Google’s claim of “4 hours” is actually a bit dramatic and opaque.

Also, AlphaZero has been training through such powerful devices that we should not try to comprehend “4 hours” in human terms. Harari, despite being a historian, is not concerned with the nuances of it all. He wants us to be scared. All things considered, it still is extraordinary that AlphaZero could teach itself chess and become the best chess player in the universe known to us. Harari uses such events to point to the future when machines will do almost all human tasks.

Then, most people will be “useless”. He writes, “The future of the masses will then depend on the goodwill of a small elite. Maybe there is goodwill for a few decades. But in a time of crisis…it would be very tempting and easy to toss the superfluous people overboard.”

But Marx would have rightly asked Harari—what are the few superhumans producing when there are not many left who can buy what they are producing?

In this question is a hint of the impossibility of such a sad future world. We do not know yet. But what we do know for sure is that in the future the rich will be smarter than the rest. Harari points out that in all of our history, and even today, the rich are not innately smarter than the rest. They merely have more opportunities. But in the future, the rich will not only have a complete monopoly over knowledge and information, they will also have access to medical procedures that expands the human mind. “…by 2100 the rich might really be more talented, more creative and more intelligent than the slum-dwellers.”

Maybe they will then write really lovely essays about the tragedy of inequality.

Wouldn’t the masses revolt? Wouldn’t the vicious middle class find neat ideological ways of destroying the machines and reigning in the trillioners? The human hostility to the algorithm has already begun.

You think the war against Aadhaar is about a conscientious middle class protecting the interests of the poor? (Canned laughter) I think it is instead the proto-war of humans against machines. In the future, the human struggle against machines, too, will look more Marxist than Spielberg.

The few superhumans then have to find a drug to keep the rest in a happy materialistic stupor. I propose, though I don’t know why I am helping the super humans, that they fabricate a global problem, like an approaching asteroid, that will keep most of the population busy with trying to resolve the issue. This adheres to Harari’s favourite theory—that people are suckers for fables and they are more attracted to stories than truth.

The most powerful human beliefs, he writes, have weak foundations but they endure as long as everything above the foundations is beautiful. “In history, the roof is sometimes more important than the foundations.”

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan





The myths of Aung San Suu Kyi


2018-09-22

About eight years ago, by some miscalculation, the upmarket Hay Festival came to Thiruvananthapuram. Western and Westernized writers were at first gladdened by the packed main hall but then they soon realized that the audience mostly stared with blank faces and did not react at all to the wisdom and subtle wit of the thinkers. Something about the global sophistication of the speakers was lost upon the literate but deeply local children-of-the-soil Malayalis. Sometimes the weight of honesty in the air can be disastrous for a posh literature festival. But then a young white woman, who was one of the volunteers and not an invited thinker, came to the podium and said, her voice choking with emotion, and tears welling in her eyes, that she had just heard the most wonderful news. Aung San Suu Kyi, who had been under house arrest in Burma (now Myanmar) for 15 years over a period of 21 years, had been released by her nation’s reigning military. The Malayali crowd, finally, was moved by something that was said on the stage. There was applause.

I tried to understand the moment. How did it come to be that parotta eaters and the asparagus-eaters were united by the news about an affluent upper-class Burmese lady? Even though writers project intellectual unity as a virtue and polarization as a disease, the fact is that often a uniform opinion across social classes is a sign that one class has conned the rest, and polarization is a sign that the provincial are liberating themselves from the colonization of global scholars.

Humans are fundamentally virtuous, but then they adopt a hierarchy of virtues, and it is the hierarchy that separates us. Suu Kyi was then among the very few people in the world who could bring together people of distinct virtue hierarchies. Her global reputation was at its peak those days; now it is in tatters. This month she defended a Myanmar court’s handing out seven-year jail sentences to two reporters of Reuters, who were at the time of their arrests working on a story on the role of the Burmese State in the murder of Rohingya Muslims. Earlier, when pressured by an American diplomat for their release, she had even called the journalists traitors. The mascot of Western values was now behaving like a third-world dictator. Journalists across the world, who had once contributed to her legend, tweeted their disgust. They didn’t ask themselves why they had been wrong about her, and how they will ensure that they do not create such global myths again. Instead they appeared to convey that they are better human beings than Suu Kyi.

For many months now there has been pressure on her to make some humane statements against the atrocities of her government against the minority Muslim population. The most sanctimonious from the disgusted global elite have asked for the revocation of one of its most coveted good-behaviour awards—the Nobel Peace Prize.

But Suu Kyi has not yielded. She is not a mere activist now. She is a politician, and a part of the government, and she does not wish to do anything to upset her constituency—the majority Bamars. She has done a political triage, and she knows she should let go of the Muslims and appease the majority. She knows her effigies are now burning, but outside her land. She has more at stake in her own nation than the foreigners who are offering her moral advice. Is it possible that she is indeed a saint, and that she cares deeply about the Muslims in her land but feels that her humanitarian posturing will not help them even as it destroys her popularity among the majority? Or, maybe, she is a communal racist who always had secret majoritarian views. In either case, what emerges is that the propensity of the pious global elite to canonize or defame public figures in cultures and circumstances it does not comprehend is a morally spurious enterprise.

The global liberal elite had built the Suu Kyi myth in its own image. She was of good stock, she went to Oxford, spoke with a British accent, she was refined, classy, beautiful. She spoke of such fabulous European inventions like human rights and democracy. The world loved her. At least one American admirer travelled to Rangoon (now Yangon), and swam in stealth across a lake to meet her. She was rewarded in more sane and substantial ways for being an excellent ambassador of Western values. One evening, in 1991, she had heard the news of her Nobel Peace Prize on the radio.

When she accepted the award, in 2012, she played along. In an exquisite Nobel lecture, she said the award should remind us of, “the oneness of humanity”. She recalled the six great human miseries as mentioned in Buddhist texts—“to be conceived, to age, to sicken, to die, to be parted from those one loves, to be forced to live in propinquity with those one does not love.” She said that human suffering was inescapable, so the role of reformation was not to end suffering but to reduce it. She said she derived her strength to fight the Burmese military junta from the Universal Declaration of Human Rights by the United Nations. She quoted some parts, “…disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted in barbarous acts which have outraged the conscience of mankind…” and she said, “human rights should be protected by the rule of law.”

This is exactly what she refuses to do now. When she was an activist she did not have to reveal the full spectrum of her personality. Now that she is a local politician, who is far more useful to her people than when she was as a venerable puppet of the West, she is assuming a different public image—an upper caste Bamar feudal lady who is pained not by human suffering but by the loss of her social status. In response to the calls from intellectuals to revoke her Nobel, Gunnar Stålsett, a former member of the Nobel committee, which is always entirely made up of Norwegian citizens, observed, “The principle we follow is the decision is not a declaration of a saint. When the decision has been made and the award has been given, that ends the responsibility of the committee.”

It is not the Nobel of Aung San Syu Kyi that has to be revoked, but the morally indefensible right of Western committees to assume they know enough to decide whom the world must look up to.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan





Escaping India within India


2018-09-29

One evening in a new club in Gurugram, as members began to trickle in, some of them noticed an anomaly in the bar area. It was nothing jarring; but something Indians notice in a fraction of a second when their eyes sweep across a room. It was too abstract, and also improper, for the members to discuss with their friends. But married couples are, in the company of each other, racists and classists, and if you had good ears, you may have heard their whispers and got a gist of things: a group of happy young men around a table did not look suave enough to be a part of the club which was meant for corporate heads (“Creative people are interesting, but they don’t have money,” the club’s co-founder told some of us, correctly). It soon became evident that the young men at the bar were indeed outsiders—they were the band for the evening.

The important quality of a private social club, the kind that is not a metaphor but really a private social club, is that it is very honest about its most important objective—to keep the other kind of Indians out. The emergence of these new private clubs is a response to the near-impossibility for the upper middle class of urban India to gain admission into the legendary old clubs. In essence, the response of the new rich to the high walls of the old rich is not the demolition of such walls, but to build new swanky walls. That is human nature, and the middle class is beginning to stop pretending that such a wish for social islands where they can escape India for a few hours is debauched.

The very goal of the entire Indian upper class, in fact, is to escape India within India. Our pursuit of the good life is automatically the pursuit of islands. Affluent India is an archipelago of islands where people pay a premium not for quality but for the invisibility of Other Indians. Our residential colonies, schools, crèches, restaurants, resorts, cars and cinemas are in reality clubs where the other Indians can enter only as “servants”.

Outside our islands, real India awaits. Roads are choked, air is poison, sad urchins say they are hungry, beggars show their deformities, and markets are filthy. But, India is too potent not to permeate the islands, and it does as the odours of the drivers and the heart-breaking stories of the maids who want a raise. And how much, in contrast to the fulminations of island intellectuals, Aadhaar has transformed their lives.

The Indian craving for social islands has only grown, driving up the prices of anything that might offer mediocre services but promises isolation from real India. Such islands are most successful and enduring in the richest segments, where the islands themselves cannot be purchased, they can only be inherited. Elsewhere, the islands are ephemeral. In the past few years, there has been an economic democratization of the nation and that has confused the social order in many Indian spaces. About a decade ago, you could walk into any five-star hotel and be confident of encountering only certain kind of people. Today, you can find such a broad spectrum of Indians in the lobby of a five-star hotel that you can recruit them as extras for not only Karan Johar’s films but also Ram Gopal Varma’s. Soon after the middle classes create a social island, the emerging classes quickly infiltrate. Upmarket experiments, like condominiums, micro-breweries, fusion food and literature festivals, have turned democratic and plebeian in no time.

About two decades ago, the architect Hafeez Contractor told me that he had a plan to create a giant meandering park, many miles long, along the Mumbai coast which will be filled with grass-covered dunes, café and theatres. He complained that the environmentalists were sabotaging the plan. “It’s always about saving some bloody fish in the Arabian Sea,” he said. There were a host of other problems too. Contractor’s effort not withstanding, it is very rare for Indian real estate developers to see long-term value in a beautiful public space. Indian businesses are so accustomed to making easy money in affluent islands that they are not trained to see the more difficult but vast wealth in common public good.

A generation ago, Indians had fewer things to convert into islands. Schools in the 1980s and 1990s, for instance, had a spectrum of Indians. Some of us studied in schools that had the children of “smugglers” (as successful business people were called in Chennai then) and slum kids. And the whole nation, or states, watched the same films. Now schools and cinema have become islands.

One of the lessons Chennai taught me is that the best way to practise caste is by making it art. The most enduring Brahmin islands of Chennai are not their residential lanes but their music and dance. So it is not surprising to me that the most respectable islands today, which are not overtly recognized as social islands, are the arts —“good” cinema, “multiplex cinema”, meaningful theatre, classical music and jazz. We also hide in “institutions”, which is a Nehruvian euphemism for the regulation of the popular low-brow by the authoritarian good stock through the medium of “ethics”.

It is not that the islanders do not enjoy mingling with the other Indians. They do at times. For instance, many of us do enjoy air-conditioned public transport, like the fabulous Delhi Metro. But only as long as we can return to our islands.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan





One theory about loneliness


2018-10-20

Do the lonely deserve compassion? It is hard to argue with this. But then most people are lonely because they too have spurned, they have rejected those who wished to be with them. Loneliness is not always a state of being rejected, it is also a consequence of a person deeming isolation superior to the slim pickings of life. Somewhere in this world there is a lonely person who is so because you are not worth her time. Even the old are lonely not because they have no company but because the company that is available to them, outside their family, is poor; the world has matched them by their caste, age, and they are stranded with acquaintances with whom they would never have dined in another time. Loneliness is not a scarcity of humans, but a rebuke—of the lonely.

A high bar for a mate is not the only cause for loneliness. There is the loneliness of small-town people in the metros, who wish to reject their useless provincial acquaintances and hit it off with the posh but they are rejected for being “downmarket” or vernacular. People who are able to enjoy the company of their own original class even as they move up in life are lucky, or at least lucky in the companionship department. There is also the loneliness that comes from isolation by your own tribe for your views and actions. This is why most people appear to have agreeable views. The phenomenon also explains why fierce intellectual independence requires loneliness. Loneliness is the f***you money of art. If you have no more friends to lose you can say anything you want.

Such a state of existence is different from the loneliness of a job, as in the case of scientific researchers, mathematicians and artists. Sustained intellectual work is possible only for those who have the ability or are trained in spending many hours a day in isolation, but such people can still be highly convivial, filing their lives with people and enjoying them without erecting a high bar for friendships. In fact, contrary to their reputation, most scientists and artists have a vast network of friends in their own fields because they need their village to get ahead. But intellectual independence is another matter. Can one be the flâneur and the heretic at the same time?

You may think loneliness is a common feature, if not the very story, in films and novels. Actually it is not a feature. Loneliness is a plot device. When I was a boy growing up in Chennai, where family is the unit of life, and I started watching Hollywood films, I noticed that Rambo did not have a family. And Arnold Schwarzenegger was mostly alone in many of his movies. I was certain that most white people did not have families. It occurred to me that even Jesus Christ, who I had thought was a white man, was mostly lonely. In many novels, too, you will find the protagonist living alone. This is a result of decluttering, which writers invented long before Marie Kondo influenced even Cancerian women to throw away stuff. One of the most difficult things to achieve while writing fiction are the unremarkable interactions between characters. It is tough but not central to what novelists wish to say. For this reason it annoys most storytellers. So they make the protagonist lonely. That reduces the problem of character interactions. The same trick of decluttering is possibly the reason why in the film Gravity, the character played by Sandra Bullock reveals that she had lost her little daughter in an accident. That way she is not yet another childless female lead, and the director does not have to worry about that inevitable but tired arc where Bullock has to talk emotional stuff from space to her girl on earth.

Storytellers have also romanticized loneliness as a sign of intelligence or strength. As a consumer of this myth in my adolescence and early 20s, I never saw my loneliness as a problem that I needed to resolve. All around me people rated companionship above many things like loyalty, decency and even fairness. But I was proud to be alone.

As a result, from age 20-30 I was known by about 25 people, in my calculation. In that time I understood that sorrow is often a misunderstanding of boredom. I used to get confused by people who had many friends, who were always out drinking, who told me they were lonely. How could beautiful women in the company of so many layers of friendship be lonely? Only later would I understand what everybody already knew—that we need to belong to someone, and own (the same person, preferably). Or we will have to prepare for loneliness. But then couples, too, feel lonely. They feel lonely together, as couples. Here too they are not spurned, rather they have spurned the couples who wish to be with them.

So do the lonely deserve sympathy?

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan





How should atheists view religion?


2018-10-27

It is still harder for young women to enter an ancient shrine on Sabarimala than to enter any liquor shop in Kerala. Mobs of devotees and political thugs have been driving away women who tried to enter the temple. Atheists are, once again, disgusted by believers. But this disgust is, once again, a useless way of perceiving believers, who form most of the world. What if there is a better way for atheists to view believers?

Actually, believers in god understand atheism more deeply than they imagine. As the biologist Richard Dawkins paraphrased an old piece of wisdom, “We are all atheists about most of the gods that humanity has ever believed in. Some of us just go one god further.” Atheists, too, understand belief more deeply than they imagine. We are all believers in unprovable ideas; just that in some of us the idea is god.

Even so isn’t it true that in a civilized world, belief in the fable of god should be subordinate to belief in the fable of law? There can only be one alpha on the street. Otherwise our protection money, also known as taxes, is a total waste. But then atheists should accept that the colonization of religion by democracy can never be a smooth transition.

In 1991, after an aggrieved man complained to the Kerala high court that fertile women were desecrating the shrine by their occasional presence, the court observed that the shrine had a right to bar such women. The court directed the Kerala government to send police force to enforce the ban. A few days ago when the Supreme Court declared that all women had a right to enter the temple, it directed the government to send police force to enforce the right. From the point of view of Ayyappan’s devotees, human law is fickle and transient, while tradition is stable and enduring.

So what? Don’t modern Indian women, including atheists, have a right to enter a temple in year 2018 even if it is not out of devotion and only to prove a point? As a non-believer it is extremely easy for me to answer this question, the reason why I would argue that my ideal state should be that of possessing no strong opinions. It is a difficult but worthy state to aspire for in this age of opinions.

In fact, modern atheism should not only be about disbelief but also dry neutrality in some aspects of religious behaviour. That could be an intellectually rich state, as evident when we interpret modern atheism as something beyond god—as fierce scepticism about all matters of faith, which includes anthropogenic climate change, the big bang theory, multi-dimensions, gravitational waves, the physicality of consciousness and the future singularity of machines. You may think that all these have strong or at least substantial scientific basis. That is not true; they are all beliefs which have highly respectable mainstream scientific explanations, and that is the new theology of our times. Scientists are the most influential theologians of our times. But when you retain your neutral mind and dig deeper into the theologies, you meet the equally respectable heretics who rubbish the mainstream’s beliefs. But atheists do believe in some of these modern religions, and if they believe in anything at all, then they must accept that the problem is not god but the very human desperation to believe in something, anything.

There is also the matter of stake. Devotees of Ayyappan point out that it is not the female believers in god who wish to risk supernatural anger and enter the shrine; it is the atheists. So the devotees ask the important question—if atheists have no stake in religion, why can’t they lay off religious matters, especially in issues that are not murderous but only unfair?

So, should atheists abandon the high moral pedestal when they are not going to face the consequences of disrupting faith? This is not very different from asking some obvious, though under-asked questions—Is it moral for non-resident Indians, or “Armani Kashmiris” in New York and Dubai, and expatriate Sri Lankan Tamils to encourage religious fundamentalism or terrorism in their homelands from a safe distance when they will not face the consequences of their actions? Is it moral for the global liberal elite to support Palestine when they are not going to be living beside a place that has democratically elected a terrorist organization called Hamas? And how intelligent can it be for the global conservatives to support Israel when their own liberties are safe from the Israelis? To be precise, what exactly is the value of having sanctimonious views that we will not pay a price for?

But then, atheists will point out, there are benefits in not having a stake as long as we have a moral compass. For instance, in the past, people whose careers did not depend on the electorate, like judges, have made bold and ethical decisions that have benefited millions.

And, it is easier to fight for the human rights of criminals when we are not among their victims. Atheism itself has used its low-stakes level headedness to reform society. People who do not believe in god are, naturally, not afraid of him and so they are able to challenge the worst aspects of faith. Even the fight against the prohibition of women in Sabarimala has a clear benefit. If Ayyappan has been made to accept all women, it is going to be very difficult for mere men to discriminate against women. I can tell you the Supreme Court has delighted little girls, including the ones who will never trek up the hill. Even so, the most enduring changes in a society come not when heretics declare war, but when the old die and a new generation of believers reform their own faith. As the economist Paul Samuelson said, paraphrasing the scientist Max Planck—“we progress funeral by funeral”.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan





Why you should stop asking, ‘What’s the takeaway’?


2018-11-10





The impossibility of discipline


2018-11-17

In the cult film The Prestige, an old Chinese magician, frail in his silk gown, limps across the stage. He makes a drum and a fish bowl, which has a live goldfish in it, appear from thin air.

It is his signature trick and almost no one in the world knows how it is done. The film, by Christopher Nolan, and the novel it is based on, by Christopher Priest, do reveal the secret. The magician hides the objects under his gown, holding them between his knees and thighs, and as he waves his magic cloth, he somehow moves his leg muscles with force, speed and discretion to place the objects on waist-high tables. But it is not in this procedure that the greatness of the trick lies. In fact, the procedure is not even the trick. The actual trick is that the Chinese magician is not frail or disabled.

He is a strong man who only pretends to be weak and have a limp, so that his painful shuffle on stage, to accommodate the objects between his knees, is not suspicious to his audience. To achieve this effect, he goes through his entire life pretending to be a frail old man with a disability. “Never, at any time, at home or in the street, day or night, did he walk with a normal gait lest his secret be exposed,” according to the novel. “Total devotion to his art,” a young magician says in the film after he figures out the trick. “A lot of self-sacrifice.”

The Chinese magician is a passing scene in the story but his presence is iconic because The Prestige is about the extent to which men will go to achieve greatness. Yet the fishbowl scene is a lame scene; a merely cinematic scene that is more visual effects than anthropology.

A few years ago I decided to practise the trick to impress my daughter. I used a large ball as a proxy for the probable fish bowl.

Those days if you told me that a task does not require innate talent but only powerful legs and ascetic discipline, I would think I had a good chance of accomplishing it. But I soon figured there was something wrong with the mechanics of the trick as explained by Priest and Nolan. It was just not possible; one cannot humanly transport a fish bowl, let alone a drum too, from between your knees to a waist-high table. I soon discovered that there is no magician in the world who can perform the trick the way the novel and the film have indicated.

It is possible for a good magician to make a fish bowl appear on stage, but the most efficient way to do that is by hiding the bowl in the table. There are other ways, but none requires the extreme discipline suggested in The Prestige. The famous Chinese trick in the cult film was a trick in itself. It was impossible magic meant to convey one of our most revered illusions—discipline. I am not referring to the kind of “discipline” that some nations, which does not include India, demonstrate while driving in lanes. I am referring to the religion and technique of personal “discipline”.

Most people believe that success is a process that involves hard, unpleasant tasks achieved through sacrifice. That is how, people imagine others and they themselves cracked entrance exams, how they lost weight, wrote novels, quit cigarettes, and even quit sex (but why?). People believe that there is will and self-control and sacrifice, and a combination of these qualities is discipline. It is one of the world’s most popular ideas.

But then is this how giant tasks are really accomplished?

Dedication and persistence can be explained without the myth of discipline. Not counting natural talent and luck, which have an outsized effect on success, we can explain what is misunderstood as the effects of discipline through love, addiction, psychological anomalies, including obsessive compulsive disorders.

People do things because they want to do those things. That is the only way to do them very well and do them well for a meaningful period of time. At times people do things because they are unable to stop, they are addicted, they are obsessed. People crack exams because they are smarter than most people in the specific department of taking tests, or they love the domains they are studying, or they have an innate capacity for unhappiness and competition, which is widely known by a more noble term—ambition.

People are lean not because they have ascetic “discipline” but more often because of their physiology, or because they have a natural distaste for fattening food, or they have good sources of information about the science of food and as seasoned readers they know how to discard spurious information. People do not smoke because they do not wish to smoke, and most chain-smokers suddenly quit not because they have suddenly discovered “willpower” but because their bodies are so abused that their organs finally reject the toxic fumes. And people who quit sex do so because they have become asexual, or have made a virtue of a necessity, which is impossible for others who do not have these mental and physical conditions. Many acts of painful self-denial today are wasteful actions of normal people who attempt to imitate the physiological or psychological anomalies of others.

Discipline, then, is the false public front for complex private procedures.

There is an obvious flimsiness to personal discipline, which we overlook. Discipline, everyone who believes in it would agree, is a quality that precedes success or failure, yet it is chiefly applied to describe success and not failure. You are more likely to hear, “He was so disciplined, it is no wonder he pulled it off”, and not “He was so disciplined, yet he fails every time”. This is how the myth of discipline has grown—as an analysis of success, which is delivered after success. We do suffer at times as a consequence of doing what we love, but we do not succeed because we suffer. For instance, amateur long-distance runners, including people like me, are widely believed to be disciplined and masochistic, but the fact is they run because they love doing it, or are addicted to it. Some runners even have obsessive compulsive disorders that push them to complete a set number of kilometres in a period of time. I am confident you are not interested in my glutes but to stress a point: After I injured my glutes and could not run, I started running backwards, an action that did not strain my injured muscles. And I ran in reverse for one month until the glutes healed. This is not discipline—this is joy, addiction and disorder.

We have a greater chance of being happier (and successful if that is important) if we use our mild and serious insanities like intense love, neurotic focus and funny disorders to get things done, than whip ourselves into doing what we do not wish to do.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets @manujosephsan





The moral obligation of melancholic people


2018-11-24

What is the moral obligation of the depressed?

Oh my god. Did you just say that?

What is the moral obligation of the unfortunate, the vulnerable, the troubled…

Please stop, please someone make him stop.

What is the moral obligation of the exiled and the marginalized? What exactly is the moral obligation of victims?

This is so repulsive. To ask this question, oh my god, this is so repulsive.

Who are you, by the way?

I am your Inner Voice.

You don’t sound like me.

I am posher than you, also emasculate and conscientious. You are asking terrible questions, you are a terrible man.

What is the moral obligation of the chronically ill? Do they not have a responsibility towards how they ingest antibiotics so that they don’t harm those who take good care of themselves? A world that is intoxicated with rights but has contempt for duties is a world in crisis. Is it so hard to accept, Inner Voice?

Such arguments are not about making sense. There is a particular kind of person who tries to make sense this way. Like Sardar Patel, who said, “Every Indian…has every right in his country but with certain duties.” People who say such things actually believe duties are the only things that matter, and rights are a nuisance.

Look Inner Voice, not very long ago it was not considered political to say we are defined by our obligations—to our parents, sibling, teachers, society, language, religion, nation and the world. And finally to the universe which we fulfilled by trying to comprehend it to the best of our mental faculties. No one spoke of rights. My mother, who faced great adversity, toiled alone and gave me a mental picture to face life: wrestlers slapping their thighs and spitting on their palms to take on anything, and to perform our duties. Duties gave us direction, and focus, and made us rise at dawn, and they made us strong and kept us away from trouble.

You are completely wrong. That life is an obligation is a myth created by the upper class to control the rest.

No. The most beautiful thing about life is that it is a debt.

Life is a lottery.

Life is a debt.

Life is a lottery.

Those who know life is a debt can find meaning because they have to then repay the debt to the universe and you fill your life with purpose. Without meaning, Inner Voice, we will be lost in the vast terrifying emptiness of freedom and pleasure.

Art is meaning. What you think is the lament of art is meaning. Great beauty comes out of it. In reality, it is the strong who are doomed. In a world that is in the spell of stories, even when they are not called stories, it is the people who have the talent for strength who are doomed. Strong people tell bad stories.

Even so, Inner Voice, what is the moral obligation of the weak?

This guy is insufferable.

Do people who are suicidal, who are innately disenchanted with the world, because of their mental states, do such people have a responsibility to ensure they are not exploited by activists and politicians? If they don’t fall for shrill campaigns against economic ideas, political ideas, technology, privacy, science, they will create a deep sane silence where the happier can hear the sounds of truth.

If you have the sense to understand human beings through rights and not duties, you will realize that people have a right to be what they are. They have a right to be influenced by their “mental states”, and to be swayed by emotions; in effect people have a right to be human. That is the very meaning of being human. Life is not science, life is a sway of sentiments and moods.

Rubbish. That humans are meant to be imperfect is our greatest bullshit, on a par with “RTs are not endorsements”. It is an excuse not to ask difficult questions. What is the moral obligation of a farmer?

Don’t even go there.

Surely they have a moral obligation not to burn crop stubble because their attempt to save some money kills people, destroys the lungs of children. Actually, why is it that a profession that consumes almost all of the world’s fresh water to create harmful but profitable food like high-starch grains and sugar, does not have a moral obligation?

This is as dumb as saying people have a duty to stay away from their rights. This is an impossible argument.

Consider Auguste Comte. The compassionate should love him. After all he invented “sociology”. He said individualism is a disease. He created a sect called “Positivism”, which even came with its own attire that had buttons only in the back so that an individual would not be able to wear it without assistance. According to him, humans are a community and an individual, as a unit, only had obligations. According to him, we began to get confused after someone invented rights.

He also said we will never figure out the materials that make up the planets of our solar system, and 20 years later we were doing just that. He doesn’t seem like a smart man.

What is that sound?

I already told you, “your Inner Voice”.

No you made a sound.

I make sounds, that’s why I am called Inner Voice.

No it was a specific sound. It was exactly what Gollum, the creature in the film Lord Of The Rings, makes when he wants to persuade Frodo to keep the power of the ring for himself.

Alright, I admit I made that creepy whispery sound. “Master”.

That’s the exact sick sound.

Master, stop asking the vulnerable about their obligations.

Go away voice from Lord Of The Rings.

Stop being an obsolete writer and start to think like an activist.

Go away Inner Voice.

That’s where the future of writing is. Be smart, Master, ask how can you use the vulnerable to secure great power for yourself. Think about it. All you have to do is pick a side.

That’s it?

Yes, just pick a side and don’t piss them off. Then you can write any lazy stuff and they will give you donations.

Now I am getting tempted.

Yes, Master, think. If you pander to the miserable, together we will rule the world.

And a great demonic laughter fills our heads.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous.

@manujosephsan





Insulting the ‘cute’ old through admiration


2018-12-09

Last week, the video clip of an old sardar’s salsa with a sari-draped woman reached hundreds of thousands of people. Everyone presumed the twirling woman was his wife because the moment was adorable only then. Also, everyone wanted to frame the dance as a “sweet” evidence of love and the persistence of happiness. People also imagined the couple had been married for decades. Maybe they also thought he smears toothpaste on her brush every morning before she rises. A common reaction among viewers was that the couple was, by the act of salsa, “keeping their love alive”. When people talk in public about love, you will think they have never been in a relationship.

The public reaction to the video was actually not a collective appreciation of enduring love. Something else was going on. It was condescension for the old, and it was condescension masquerading as admiration. In using words like “sweet” and “cute” for the old man and his partner of ambiguous (hence probably advanced) age, people were inadvertently exposing their opinion that they consider the old to be inferior humans who are normally incapable of elementary dancing. In presuming that they were married, people inadvertently revealed their opinion that love is an equal handicap—the old must not aspire beyond the old.

What if the same old man was in fact a sugar-daddy billionaire and his partner was a 20-year-old model? What if he were an old man who wished to be “in the game”? Suddenly the same dance would make him despicable because he would now be a potent male, not a “cute” old man who restricts himself to be in the company of an old woman.

You may say there was a bit of compassion in the people who rejoiced the salsa. Of course, there was. In fact, condescension usually masquerades as compassion. In The Unbearable Lightness Of Being, Milan Kundera pauses the narration of the story to explain that the word “compassion” ought to read that it “generally inspires suspicion” because, even though compassion can be a glorious human emotion in some people, it so often is merely covert condescension—“it designates what is considered an inferior, second-rate sentiment that has little to do with love”.

Admiration is worse because it hides disdain much more efficiently than compassion. Being old is a caste and most of us are racists. And a mark of our times is that the most vicious racists don’t insult—they appreciate, they patronise. There is a bit of this even in the effusive compliments of the young for the middle-aged. “I have a crush” and “you are so hot” when directed by the young towards the old are so often, if not always, feudal moments of patronage.

The salsa video is among the occasional “old-persons” video that goes viral every now and then. An old woman does cartwheels, and the world, which is filled with the unfit lazy young, patronises her. An old man describes his late wife as “angelic” and people advertise they want to cry.

The most atrocious clip was recorded by a gang of young girls outside an airport. In the film, a very old man waits outside the arrival gate holding a bouquet. He is unaware, of course, that he is being recorded from a good distance. An old woman arrives and he gives her the flowers. The world swooned over the apparent beauty of the moment.

What if the old man was, in fact, having a secret affair? Maybe he was tired of his bickering 75-year-old wife and wished to feel the smooth skin and firmer breasts of a 65-year-old woman.

You may argue, because you don’t want me to ruin beauty, that when we admire the joy of the old, we are seeing ourselves in the future, and the hope that we, too, will give and receive bouquets (from and to a respectably old person). But if you observe the language of our admiration, inside our heads and outside, we will see that this is not how we speak to ourselves. We never talk down to future selves, but we do so to the old.

Even the great Roger Federer has to face the absurdity of the ordinary young patronising him. Every time he wins, it is seen in the context of his age. The reason why journalists consider 40-year-old athletes as handicaps is that most journalists are unfit. Every now and then, I tweet a plea to editors, “Only journalists who can run 100m in under 15 seconds should be allowed to comment on Federer’s fitness” (I suggest 15 seconds because that is the time I am assured to run 100m if challenged at any given time of the day).

The unfit young usually overreact to the fitness of the older. In this way and other ways, the world, which has a low bar for itself, has created a very low bar for the old, too, while in actuality a regular 60-year-old who is fit can have the physique and innards of a 30-year-old. Instead, the old are nudged everyday to think of themselves as handicaps. When they are tired or weak, they don’t realise even the young feel tired; they are certain, it is an inevitability of age. They also grow to ignore physical vanity, whose contribution to the very meaning of life is underrated.

The reactions to old-people-doing-cute-stuff videos are on a par with other subtle acts of patronising, like the overblown reaction to sari-clad scientists of the Indian space programme.

The cuteness of “jugaad”, too, and the glorification of Rajinikanth’s comical gentrification. And “the dignity” of impoverished farmers on protests in Delhi and Mumbai who are complimented for not creating traffic jams or disrupting middle-class lives.

Manu Joseph, a journalist and a novelist, most recent of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous, was a Mint Lounge columnist.

Comments are welcome at views@livemint.com





Is the big fat Indian wedding more vulgar than you?


2018-12-16

A slew of extravagant weddings this month has repulsed a type of middle-class Indian, even though he may not be from the South. Too golden, too grand, too garish, he complained. How can you spend so much money when there is “agrarian distress”? The urban middle-class does not employ the poor merely to cook for them, drive them and walk their dogs, but also to be used as moral pedestals to stand on and accuse those who are richer than them that they are “too vulgar in a poor country”.

Some people were even reminded of the time when police raided wedding feasts because India was so deficient in food there were limits to how much food can be served. But now that Indians are allowed to be debauched, the urbane middle-class is disgusted.

But then do India’s vast poor make a serious distinction between the billionaires, multi-millionaires, the mere millionaires and the rest of the top 1%? Aren’t the Skodas of the conscientious “austere” Indians as gaudy as the Maybachs in the eyes of the starving? And isn’t the elegant and spare soiree on the lawns as vulgar as mega-weddings in the eyes of gaping drivers? And the disdain that Arundhati Roy has for Mukesh Ambani’s giant home, wouldn’t a malnourished tribal feel the same way for Roy’s affluent home in the Delhi’s prime Jor Bagh?

The conscience of the nation are asset millionaires themselves, or at least they belong to the top 1% by income, considering the fact that India is so poor it takes only a household income of about ₹ 2 lakh a month to qualify. What they think is austerity is still vulgar in their impoverished nation. Also, to the poor, it is the upper middle class that is the most visible section of the rich, because the ionosphere of the super-rich is beyond what their eyes can see. This is what commentators missed in the aftermath of “demonetisation” when they did not see its political popularity—in the public misery of the middle class, the average voter saw the rare fall of the rich.

The vulgarity of super-rich weddings should ideally suggest to the Indian middle class how vulgar they themselves appear to the poor. The classy think their wealth is hidden from plain sight, but there are things that are not invisible to the poor. In fact, class reminds them of both wealth and alien culture, the reason why class is politically more despicable than son-of-the-soil wealth. Isn’t it true after all that the average Indian relates more with Salman Khan, a multi-millionaire, than with any of Delhi’s “austere” intellectuals whose only extravagance is the invisible money their parents had spent on their college degrees?

From this fault line flows a stream of politics. Indian politics is the revenge of the poor, but it does not pain the provincial capitalists as much as it harms the global Indian, the believer in both the West European enlightenment and peepal tree enlightenment. This is not exclusively an Indian phenomenon.

In one of the several attempts by the New Yorker magazine to understand the popularity of Donald Trump, the magazine quoted Charles Keeney, a history professor: “When people (in West Virginia county) talk about Trump, they talk about how they don’t like the establishment or the élites…When they say that, they mean who they see on television—they envision people in New York City making fun of them and calling them stupid…So when they see that the media élite is driven out of their mind at the success of Donald Trump it makes them want to root for him. It’s like giving the middle finger to the rest of the country.”

They find the sophisticates so vulgar that they identify more with Trump, a very rich man.

The rise of strongmen and of the right across the world, and the Brexit vote, too, is a demonstration of the fact that the average voter despises the articulate global intellectual–so much, that even when the intellectual talks sense, the voter hates sense itself. People are not irrational; they just hate some people more than others. This is why it has been an excellent strategy for some intellectuals to seek refuge in activism, where they are more endearing.

You may argue that the poor can tell the difference between you and a billionaire who commutes in choppers. I grant this though I will find it hilarious to tell a poor man, “Wealth, my friend, is a spectrum.” Is poverty a spectrum? There can be a spectrum of data, but is the state of being poor a spectrum?

In politics, identity is never a spectrum. Political identity is often binary–flawed, but binary. Male, female. White, black. Rich, poor. There was a time when the Indian middle-class behaved like the poor (many of us went to ration shops, we went to the same schools and watched the same film as the poor in the same theatre and, probably, voted for the same political party, Congress). But today, we behave more like the rich. A person always knows the precise answer to the question: In your nation are you rich or poor?

There is a view that the rich of India subsidise the poor. But, as the former chief economic adviser Arvind Subramanian pointed out in the economic survey in 2015, India’s subsidies benefit the rich more because they are in a position to consume more of the cheap power, utility and food. Also, the lifestyle of the middle class is subsidised by the low-wages of the poor. Being middle-class in a poor country is to be rich at a heavy discount.

Manu Joseph, a journalist and a novelist, most recent of Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous, was a Mint Lounge columnist.

Comments are welcome at views@livemint.com





Is ‘farmer suicide’ fake news, but of the good folks?


2018-12-24

One measure of human misery in India is a state secret. The government has not released a figure—how many farmers or farm workers in India killed themselves every year since 2015. This suicide demographic is important to activists who have successfully developed a phenomenon called “farmer suicides” to promote the fiction or half-truth that India’s farmers and landless farm labourers kill themselves because of debt and poverty.

It is odd, at first glance, that the government should be secretive about the latest statistics of “farmer suicides”. The data, last published by the National Crime Records Bureau in 2015, actually shows that India’s farmers and other agricultural workers are less likely to kill themselves compared to other sections of society. Also, the poorest agricultural workers in India are less likely to kill themselves compared to more fortunate farmers, challenging the correlation between poverty and suicide. In fact, India’s rural poor are less likely to commit suicide than far more affluent citizens of most advanced economies. However, the perception is so deeply rooted and wide that India’s farmers commit suicide because of debt and poverty, that the government is probably scared of revealing any figures that can help its political opponents.

Historically, people have projected their favourite ideas on suicides. Poets thought it was a philosophical act. Nationalists thought it was a patriotic act. The romantics thought it was the ultimate act of passion.

Mainstream scientific opinion today has a dry view—suicide is primarily a mental health issue, which is influenced by a person’s neurological make-up, genes, circumstances, diseases, even gut bacteria, and environment.

A recent paper, ‘The Lancet Commission on global mental health and sustainable development’, shows a correlation between poverty and mental health. However, contrary to the picture activists paint, it appears that the state of poverty is not a monolithic neurological profile.

In the transmission of the idea of “farmer suicides” activists have exploited a naive aspect of journalism—to assign causes to suicide depending on who has committed the act. In a student preparing for an engineering entrance exam, the “cause” of suicide is “stress”; in a Dalit student it is “oppression”, and in a farmer it is “agrarian distress”.

“Farmer suicide” has the qualities of stupendously successful fake news. It is not an outright lie, but not a fact either, and those who want to believe it, do so because it corroborates something else. But then, so what if it is fake news? This is an exceedingly important question which guides several people who can see through the falsity of the propaganda, but believe propaganda from good folks is not a bad thing. The reasoning is that, after all, the exaggeration and the excessive extrapolation of a phenomenon is to help the poor in a cruel nation. How else can the good fight evil if they are not a bit cunning?

This is a flawed reasoning. The hypothesis of ‘farmer suicide’ is, in fact, dangerous.

If people are willing to believe that poverty is a trigger of suicide they should accept a far more powerful trigger, whose evidence, too, is far more substantial than the poverty angle. The trigger is in the news of suicide itself, in the very transmission of the idea that a type of person in a specific circumstance is very likely to commit suicide.

This is why a recommendation for journalists prepared in 2015 by a global network of organizations, including the largest scientific organisation in the world, the National Institute of Mental Health, states that the news media should “avoid reporting that death by suicide was preceded by a single event, such as a recent job loss, divorce or bad grades. Reporting like this leaves the public with an overly simplistic and misleading understanding of suicide”. The note also discourages “describing recent suicides as an ‘epidemic,’ ‘skyrocketing’, or in other strong terms”. In short, how activists transmit the news of “farmer suicides” and how most of Indian media report the phenomenon is exactly what some of the most respected institutes in the world that study suicide suggest we should not do.

The news media comes up with several new “causes” for suicide. We have read about an online game called “Blue Whale Challenge” that sent adolescents to obedient deaths. Tibetan monks immolated themselves, peacefully, to protest against China. Such “causes” did not last long. If they were indeed “causes” they should have endured, but they faded away soon after the news cycle ended. These “causes” were fanned by the media. Many other “causes” have become extinct as the world has moved on. “Farmer suicide” has endured because it is politically useful to ideologues and journalism has not had the conviction to reject the “causes” that the activists have promoted.

Also, the propaganda of “farmer suicide” benefits activists more than farmers. The idea of debt-driven suicide was popularised by the activist Vandana Shiva in her attempt to create public opinion against genetically modified crops. Now, the idea is used by various activists who wish to flog their own agendas.

Also, a nation that is trained to react to suicides as a social, economic and political phenomenon, may become a society that will not be moved by the living anymore. “How can you be so miserable,” the rich may ask the poor one day, “If people like you are not killing yourself?”

Manu Joseph is a journalist and author, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed and Dangerous’.





A guide to the corrupt intellectual’s year-end lists


2018-12-30

Around this time every year, intellectuals release lists of people whom we should adore. This is a morally dubious, intellectually dull, and journalistically meaningless exercise. The number of suckers who take such lists seriously has gone down in the past years as the power of intellectuals has declined, but the tradition of compiling lists has endured. Here is a reader’s guide to how and why these lists are made.

1) The intellectual who agrees to compile a list of the finest minds in his field of activity will try to exclude his rivals in the tribute. The important quality of a rival is not that he or she is a contender, but that the rival is primarily an equal.

2) Envy is not an emotion that is born out of deprivation, rather envy is a quality between equals. So an academic or a writer or any other type of artist will first name superstars in his field, who are beyond competition and professionally very useful to suck up to. (The only meaningful form of networking is one that is not called networking.) Then he will create moralistic reasons to include people at the bottom who are not a threat to him. When an intellectual pays tributes to “the new voices” or “the fresh voices” or “the outliers”, he or she means “people who don’t threaten my place”. This is the reason why many middle-aged intellectuals appear to be generous to the youth, debutants and the provincial vernacular.

3) The non-threatening provincial intellectual is a particular favourite of Indian English writers who need hyper-moral reasons to subdue their more potent contemporaries. This is why the Indian anglicized intellectual has been so generous to, say, Perumal Murugan in ways Tamil intellectuals have never been.

4) The wariness for the contemporary is the reason why most Indian writers in English, when asked to name their favourite “Indian writers”, will name either R.K. Narayan or Kiran Nagarkar—because they are not rivals.

5) The question readers should ask is whether intellectuals and artists who are vulnerable to pettiness are reliable interpreters of the world and of the mind. (The answer is “yes” but that is for another day.)

6) The greatest insult for any talented artist is not the exclusion from the lists of the petty intellectual, but to realise that the petty intellectual thinks you are his equal.

7) In American and British year-end lists, there is usually a “global” category for best books and films. In Western civilisation, “global” means stuff from Africa or Asia that is quaint enough to be foreign but not so authentic that it will be incomprehensible to the West. By the way, this is exactly how Nasa searches for extraterrestrials in the universe—a life form that is certainly not us but still organic life, drinks water and sends radio signals.

8) In recent times, a new list category has surfaced—intellectuals. This is understandable because for years intellectuals have been compiling lists and now they want to be in the lists.

9) As in the case of the word “meditation”, everybody appears to be sure what the word “intellectual” means but when you start asking people specific questions you get varied and contradictory answers. An intellectual is usually referred to as a “thinker”. By this people mean “an original thinker” because every human is after all “a thinker”. But then it is hard to imagine intellectuals as “original thinkers” because their very success depends on how much they belong to a set of old tired thoughts, also known as ideology. Intellectuals are more of a monoculture than a sugarcane farm. But I like intellectuals—not because they are “thinkers” (they usually are not) but because they are scholarly sponges of the intelligence of other people.

10) Time magazine’s annual list of influential people is hilarious because Time itself is not influential anymore. But it is hard to refute that the list was an institution once. It was powerful in a way no Indian list, or award, ever has been. It is odd that Indian intellectuals keep talking about “Nehruvian

institutions” and “falling standards of institutions”, yet they have been unable to create institutions themselves. Somehow they missed their chance in the golden age of intellectual middlemen.

11) Intellectuals love institutions because they fear absolute social democracy. An institution, after all, is meant to subdue those who have been elected by the masses. This sentiment is evident in the year-end lists, too. The lists, if you notice, are never an objective ranking of the most popular works as decided by paying consumers. The lists are always a subjective ranking of what a minority thinks is good. Objective lists are democratic. Subjective lists aspire to be institutions.

12) People on objective lists never brag about their inclusion—like those who are voted the richest or the most powerful, because they obviously are the richest and the most powerful. Those who are on the subjective lists almost always tweet about it. There is something highly inelegant about a person tweeting that he or she has been mentioned in a list. But the age of elegance in public relations is over. Now everybody needs to shout for attention. (This columnist, too, does that.) As a result, the lists are more famous than those who are listed.

13) All things considered, a year-end list is an act of war against all talented and successful people except those who are included in the lists.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and author, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed and Dangerous’.





Sabarimala and the dangers of overrating arguments


2019-01-06

About 15 years ago, I visited a Hindu temple in Karachi. At the entrance stood a Hindu male in a Pathan suit waving a cane to drive away Muslims. Every now and then he screamed, “Jai Shiv Shankar”. When I tried to enter, he told me that Muslims were not allowed inside. I told him I was Indian. He asked to see my passport. He was confused when he learned I had a Christian surname, but because I was Indian, he decided to let me in. I told him I would have thought it very dangerous for a Hindu to stand in a temple in the heart of Karachi and wave a stick at Muslims to deny them entry. He said he had rights. In another temple in the city, I saw a group of Muslim girls begging a cantankerous old woman to let them in. We just want to look, they said. “Then go to the zoo,” the unyielding old woman said.

When I reported this, Indians who rated freedoms higher than cultural norms marvelled at the phenomenon, which they interpreted not as discrimination against the Muslims of Pakistan but as a minority’s exquisite right to practise their faith by following its cultural norms.

Now they hold a very different view in a very similar matter. After the Supreme Court ruled that the autonomy of the temple at Sabarimala was subordinate to the rights of women of menstruating age to enter it, there is a view in the mainstream intellectual community that if we aspire to be refined and modern, we must accept that all religious wounds are subordinate to any woman’s right to enter any place of worship.

I am in Kerala right now and when I ask people about the issue, I get very familiar answers. The atheists, who covertly or overtly feel that believers in God are fools, say religion must reform. The believers in God, including young women, say the ban on women is not such a great evil that atheists should try to “reform” a cultural code. They point out that women of all faiths are allowed in Ayyappan temples but in Sabarimala, the God is present as a celibate, who does not wish to see the allure of women. Atheists find this laughable. But believers say it is bizarre that the world must consider the fable of religion extremely important, yet tinker with its story arcs. By the way, by “believers in God”, I don’t mean those who say “I believe in a force” or some such bull, but I certainly include staunch Christians and Muslims.

There are no clinching arguments in this debate. Both sides have very powerful arguments. The controversy, in fact, exposes the true nature of arguments. An argument appears to substantiate a belief, it appears to come inside a person’s head to build a case, but in reality, if I may repeat a point I have made earlier in this paper, an argument is a reverse engineering of a religious moment. We believe first and then we discover or plagiarise strong corroborations to dress up our faiths, including “scientific” faiths.

Yet, in all walks of modern life, arguments have risen in primacy because they provide the farcical optics of democratic procedure. It is this cultural pre-eminence of arguments in our age that gave the Supreme Court the confidence which the Kerala high court did not have in 1991—to resolve after hearing “arguments” an issue that is in actuality impossible to argue.

Let us look at some of the arguments:

■ Once “low-castes” were denied entry into temples. Courts intervened. Religious sentiments were hurt, but now everyone is fine with it. This is how faith is reformed.

■ The “low-castes” wished to enter the temples, so it was a right that they sought. But women who believe in Ayyappan did not ask for the right to enter the shrine. It is a right sought and won by atheists, who do not care about religious practices.

■ The idea that any aspect of women is impure or that women are an embodiment of something alluring alone has no place in the modern society. Also, in the future, female believers of Ayyappan may have a very different view from their mothers.

■ On what moral authority are a handful of people deciding these matters for a majority?

■ Can law colonise faith?

■ In any case, in any civilised society, faith is subordinate to the law. The temple’s moral code did not kill people. The Supreme Court’s verdict did. At times, the intervention of an unqualified group of intellectuals can be very dangerous.

■ Political thugs cannot be allowed to hold democracy hostage.

■ Law is subordinate to emotions of the public. The people who want women to enter the shrine are those who have no stake in how the public feels. But politicians do. This is exactly why major ambassadors of liberal values, like Shashi Tharoor, are opposed to the entry of women. Politicians, except the communists, have made very “conservative” statements.

■ The court is above public sentiments.

■ If judges can lean on “the collective conscience of the nation” to hang people, then maybe they should also respect the “conscience” when it enacts law.

Only people who are infected by ideology can find a moral hierarchy for such arguments. Yet, the Supreme Court did exactly that.

In such arguments, “liberals” usually use the future as a trump card. The present is defamed as an inferior time, and the future is promoted as something that has to be “better” than the present. But the present is an important dimension in any cultural debate. We live in the present, we are wounded in the present.

If you keep pampering the future, you will disregard the present of the people, and they will drag the future deep into the past.

Manu Joseph a journalist and a novelist, was a Mint Lounge columnist.





Why the upper classes are imitating the weak


2019-01-13

If you are married to a Jain you may have heard the comment, “This egg is too eggy.” Or, “This fish is too fishy.” I am reminded of this every time people complain that our politicians are pampering “the vote bank”. That is like saying our electoral democracy is being too electoral and that our politicians are being too political. We heard a lot of this from concerned citizens over the past few days after the government announced a 10% quota for upper castes in educational institutions and jobs. Most of the opposition backed the move, exasperating social activists and unpliable journalists. What should be of greater interest to the guardians of the weak is that increasingly the political movements, tactics and sentiments of the socially weak are being adopted by the strong. Usually, in a society, the strong get their way by intimidating the weak or exerting disproportionate influence, but now the strong are discovering the power of lament, vulnerability, victimhood and the moral high ground.

While proposing the quota the government said it was for the “poor” among those castes that were too high to qualify for any of the existing quotas, but the proposal’s poverty threshold is so high that over 95% of India’s top social rung will probably be in contention. This makes the quota a farce. The social justice and empowerment minister has hinted that the economic qualifier will be brought down as a way of introducing common sense into the policy. In any case, nothing alters the fact that what India has proposed is a quota for the upper castes.

Would B.R. Ambedkar have ever thought that a day would come when the upper castes of India would get a quota for themselves? If India’s finest thinker had not anticipated this, it is because it did not occur to him that the behavioural politics of the oppressed would be imitated and usurped by the strong. This is a phenomenon that we can observe across the world, chiefly in democracies. The strong are even claiming to be offended for being deemed privileged. They even use those two phony expressions that until now were the preserve of “vulnerable”, politically correct charlatans: “It’s problematic” and “It’s offensive.”

In November 2018, a group of journalists, all of them women, posed for a photograph with the CEO of Twitter, Jack Dorsey, who held a placard that said, “Smash Brahminical Patriarchy”. The response to the image was unusual. Until recently, the Brahmins of modern India lurked in historical guilt. If they believed in their genetic superiority, they conveyed it only among themselves and in private. They certainly did not object to any exhortation that their power should be decimated. But now they rose in rage against a mere metaphor on a mere placard. They found the reference “casteist”, “racist”. They said they were offended, and that their sentiments had been hurt, which in India clearly means, “I want to put you away in jail.” Dorsey had to issue an apology.

In the US, Donald Trump has used the #MeToo movement and its framing of men as a repulsive collective to give white men the most prized quality of our times—victimhood. He said it was a “difficult” and “scary” time for young men in America who, he claimed, were at risk of being falsely accused by women. His son, Trump Jr, said that he was more worried about his sons than his daughters in the age of #MeToo. Men as victims of women is not a new idea but it was always a nutty fringe movement. Now it is more mainstream than the media portrays. From what I gather, American men are exhibiting a set of behaviour that is similar to the political behaviour of women—for instance, they consider themselves a political bloc with common concerns and fears. In response, the Democrats appear to be wary of strident, articulate and intellectual women, like their senator Elizabeth Warren, who will intimidate the average American male.

In other places, the new urbane male may not despise strong women but he has other torments, psychological and social, and in the liberation of modern emasculation, he is enthusiastic about flogging them.

Why is this happening? The most important reason why the privileged are imitating the weak is in the huge success of the movements of the socially deprived. For instance, caste-based reservations has worked well. Not just that, their biggest beneficiaries have been the most privileged families within those communities. On the back of reservations, they have overtaken their equals in other castes. That is the flaw in every quota. The primary beneficiaries are the cream of the community. This is why many socially powerful castes in India feel they have a moral right to ask for quotas.

Also, there has been a loss of respect for reformers. The champions of equality are all beneficiaries of inequality. For instance, in the “Brahminical patriarchy” image, the Brahmins did not see any social underdog. When women who were not only privileged but got more opportunities than most Indian men abuse “Brahminical patriarchy”, the claim is so farcical it gives a Brahmin the moral confidence to be offended.

This confidence is a contribution of social activism itself, which has created a culture of lament. In a society that rewards expressions of vulnerability, it was inevitable that even the fortunate will find moral reasons to state that they have been wronged.

In the age of lament, we hear those who are born with the megaphones.

Manu Joseph a journalist and a novelist, was a former columnist for ‘The New York Times’





The end of affection between men and women


2019-01-20

In the latest Gillette ad, the problem is not a stubble that can only be solved by “razor technology”. The problem is men. The ad shows normal boys and men as flawed because their behaviour is male. In the background is the chant of “Me Too”. Boys bully and men appear to like sexy women. Young men stand behind barbecues and even though they are clean-shaven, they are portrayed as zombies who mutter in a loop, “boys will be boys”. Gillette, which overcharges women for the same blades it sells men (but in pink), exhorts “men” to be better people.

Women rejoiced after seeing the ad, but most men didn’t. In line with the tendency of straight men to imitate the victimhood of privileged women, as this column discussed last week, men were offended and demonstrated it in the mainstream and social media. They said the ad criminalised masculinity by juxtaposing delinquent behaviour with innocuous manly ways of life.

The ad is a part of an ongoing movement across the world against the nature of men. It is true that there was always a movement against men, and we should be wary of falling into the trap that every generation falls into, which is to overrate the importance of their age.

Even so, it is hard to dispute that the Me Too campaign, the ascendency of Donald Trump and the rising fundamentalism of political correctness in the mainstream media have made our times the most hostile towards the idea of men and manliness. Under attack is not only the delinquency and criminality of some, but of almost everything that constitutes regular heterosexual men—their notions of physical and emotional strength, their amusement at herbal tea, their ability to monopolise lucrative professions through their capacity for soullessness, and how they speak and listen, and the mere hydraulics of their erections.

Men, assured of their primacy in the world, used to respond to hatred through self-deprecatory jokes, but are now unable to laugh it off. As a consequence, the affection between men and women is being extinguished. Never before has there been such a deep disenchantment with the other. I am not talking about men and women as lovers but as public concepts in the eyes of each other. Many women tell me that this feeling is not new to them, but that the dislike is deepening in the present age. You may argue that men, too, have for long harboured dislike, even hatred, for women, especially when women challenge, replace or reject them. However, today, even modern and refined men who cannot be easily made to feel insecure are covertly and overtly finding broader reasons to dislike the idea of women.

We derive our depth as humans not only from loving those who are dear to us but by loving concepts such as nation, home, religion, and nature. Affection for the other gender is as crucial to the mental well-being of a person. For the same reasons that it is a good idea to love humanity, men should have an unconditional affection for the idea of women and women for the idea of men. However, today, for many, this is becoming impossible. This collapse of affection is something as calamitous as ecological degradation. Maybe it is irreversible too.

From this important dislike very potent politics is set to grow. Men are increasingly reaching out to tradition and culture, hence nationalism, to explain why they dislike the global female intellectual. Also, men are increasingly stating in organized ways that they are abused, that they too are victims or that they have been discriminated against. In the West, male intellectuals who are questioning the many fundamental arguments of feminism are growing hugely popular. Also, male intellectuals and writers are realizing that the accusation of being “a sexist” is so overused that it has lost its terror.

What we are going through, or enduring, is the reformation of men—by women and some very phoney men. As in the case of any reformation, the message of the reformers simply is “why can’t you be more like us”. In the case of some male reformers, the message is “why can’t you be as phoney as us”. Among them the most entertaining are ambassadors of men-must-cry. My unsolicited advice to men is crying in front of the woman you love is not a bad idea but it has to be a once- or twice-in-a-lifetime event. It will achieve what Roger Federer’s tears achieve: “I might be great but this metal cup means something to me.” However, if you cry frequently, you will be as annoying as Federer but without being Federer.

Many aspects of the reformation are useful to men, such as the movement against harassment and even the campaign to infuse common sense into men who think yoga is feminine. Patrick Broome, the yoga coach of the German soccer team that won the 2014 World Cup, told me that some of his players needed an excuse to go to the yoga studio. “So they made it look like an accident that they had landed in the yoga class, as though they were searching for the gym and had got lost.” Eventually, yoga saved many players from injuries.

The modern disaffection for the other gender, while destructive in many ways, does contain a sign of something good. That men are finally yielding power. Many years ago, B.R. Ambedkar had told the “lowest” castes something that is true for everyone trying to rebel against power. “It is your claim to equality which hurts them…If you continue to accept your lowly status ungrudgingly…they will allow you to live in peace. The moment you start to raise your level, the conflict starts.”

Manu Joseph is a journalist, is also a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed and Dangerous’





The Gandhis and the power of the second-best choice


2019-01-27

The formal entry of Priyanka Gandhi into electoral politics has reaffirmed an old conviction of Indians that the most powerful members of the Congress consider themselves subordinate to the Gandhi family and that they believe the family is the best bet to lead them. This is a wrong hypothesis today.

I believe that P. Chidambaram’s best idea for party leadership is P. Chidambaram. And Shashi Tharoor’s is Shashi Tharoor. And Kapil Sibal’s is Kapil Sibal. But what is their second-best idea? The enduring charm of the Gandhis is not that they are the Congress’s best bet, but that they are everyone’s second-best bet

In many aspects of life, the second best idea is more influential than the best idea because the best idea is often you, or yours, but the second-best idea is almost everyone’s second-best idea.

I do not say that the best idea always loses to the second best. Just that the second-best idea is more likely to win and we can see this likelihood in democratic systems such as modern marriage and policy making, and also in autocratic systems such as your parents’ marriage, corporations and terror hierarchies. The most important quality of the second-best idea is that the players grow to believe it is innately the best idea

I must tell you my favourite ISI story. When the US used to fund Afghanistan’s war against Russia through several channels, including Pakistan’s Inter-Services Intelligence, Hamid Gul, the then head of ISI, had backed one of the seven major Afghan tribal chiefs, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. Many years later, the journalist Lawrence Wright asked Gul why he had favoured Hekmatyar. Gul told Wright,“I went to each of the seven, you see, and I asked them, ‘I know you are the strongest, but who is No. 2?’… They all said Hekmatyar.

The most respectable avatar of the second-best idea is“consensus”. When seen in this form, we can understand democracy itself as a network of second-best ideas. Consensus is a deceptive word, which conveys a sense that it is a tweaked version of the best idea or that it contains the spirit of the best idea. The second-best idea is often a whole different line of thought.

The power of the second best is as common in our daily lives as in the grand political events of our times. For instance, the world’s pursuit of health, too, is in the power of the second best. The best solution to any form of addiction is abstinence

Ideally people should renounce the whole way of life that makes them smoke and the whole culture that makes them eat refined grain and sugar. However, this idea is not as influential as moderation. People are more likely to begin their path to recovery but by cutting down on the poisons rather than giving up. This, though, is a rare case where the best idea is actually better than the second best in practice.

Also, people have fantastic ideas about their ideal romance but in the end they choose Plan B as mates. It is as though in matters of love, Plan A does not really exist.

In the practical world, the best idea usually has very serious and fundamental flaws. It is, at times, a mythical ideal created by a thinker’s articulation, which makes no sense in reality. Like communism, for instance. Or, it has its origin sin academic thought experiments that the world has taken too seriously.

In economics, the theory of the second-best was formalised in 1956 when economists Richard Lipsey and Kelvin Lancaster laid out their“General Theory of the Second Best”.“Free

Exchange”, a blog of The Economist, once argued that the most important aspect of the theory is that it shows that the best idea is often an impractical ideal and that the second-best ideas are doomed if they try to imitate the qualities of the best idea. Rather, the finest second-best idea “may look starkly different than the first best”. The blog adds,“To say that we live in a second best world is just to say we live in the real world, not a blackboard model… The best policy-oriented economists, both left and right, are second best economists in the sense that they grasp the lesson of their fictions, but aim at truly feasible ideals, not blackboard utopias.”

This is a reason why those who hate demonetization are wrong in condemning it by saying it was a bad idea. They should condemn it as the best idea. That was the real issue with DeMo. It was the theoretical ideal to destroy illicit cash, according to those who had the power to push the idea through. It may not be the disaster that critics make it out to be, but considering the havoc it caused in the practical world, its impact was modest. It appears that Indians have gone back to their old corrupt ways. DeMo has not broken a deep national habit.

The non-moralistic way of looking at financial immorality is that the morality of taxation is merely an idea. Some will argue that, all things considered, handing out protection money to the state, or tax compliance, is the best idea for a citizen. But then some will argue that tax-evasion is the second-best idea.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Why you may not know that Anna Hazare is on a fast


2019-02-03

In some intellectual fields, success occurs when influential people misunderstand a piece of work. Revolutions, too, succeed when they are misunderstood by the right people. Anna Hazare, for instance, could create a public frenzy in the summer of 2011 because of a string of misinterpretations, delusions and naive beliefs within some cabals.

On Thursday, he went on a death-fast again chiefly to coerce politicians into appointing virtuous anti-corruption super babus who will have power over the very people who appointed them. Even if he chooses to actually die rather than drink the orange juice of failure, here are the reasons why Hazare will fail to create an anti-corruption movement a second time.

Now they know him too well in Delhi. You will find it hard to believe this but the fact is that in 2011 when he arrived in Delhi to sit on the death fast, Delhi’s editors had very little knowledge of who exactly Hazare was. They thought he was an endearing and inconsequential old man from rural Maharashtra. They were not aware that he was philosophically closer to the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh than to European enlightenment. But this factor, on its own, is not so important. There is something more interesting.

At the time of Hazare’s fast, the top rung of India’s television news was in a moral crisis following the revelation of the Niira Radia tapes, a set of leaked telephone conversations between a lobbyist and public figures that showed some influential journalists as pawns of corporations and the government. Hazare’s “anti-corruption” movement gave powerful journalists an opportunity to posture that they could “speak truth to power”. As a result, Hazare’s movement got the support of both the liberal media and the fledgling other side, leading to a news coverage that was extraordinary and disproportionate to the actual size and scope of the movement during the first 48 hours of what was merely one of Hazare’s many fasts.

Among the journalistic stories that build public perception, some emerge from beat reporters and some from their bosses, the editors. The public perception that the “right to information” was an achievable vital right emerged from reporters who covered a modest semi-urban movement for many months. The public perception that Rahul Dravid is “The Wall”, and that being “The Wall” was a precious talent, did not emerge from lowly sports reporters but from aesthete editors. Usually, the perceptions that emerge from reporters have more substance but the perceptions that editors build are often more powerful. Hazare’s revolution was the creation of editors. But now, too many things have changed for him to be a beneficiary yet again.

In 2011, much of India’s urban middle class was politically naive. It ought to be noted that at the time, in Kerala and West Bengal, where the political faculties of the middle class was highly evolved, the anti-corruption movement made little impact. In those two states, people did not start strutting around in the “I Am Anna” caps and regular citizens did not start spontaneous death fasts of their own. But for other urban Indians, the fast was their first glimpse into a political movement, and they transmitted the revolution through the current of naive passion. Now, the urban middle class is far from naive; it is deeply political.

The fact is that Hazare dislikes the urban upper middle class. In fact, in 2011, the first two days of his revolutionary fast were not merely anti-politician, it was essentially anti-rich. He and his followers lamented that politicians were building roads and airports when farmers were starving. But when Team Anna saw the support of the urban middle class, the anti-corruption movement became a clearly focused movement against politicians.

In that form, it was an anti-Congress movement not only because the Congress was at the helm of the government. In fact, the anti-corruption movement got urban support only because its arch villain was the Congress. In public perception, the Congress party has a monopoly over corruption in a way the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) has a monopoly over communal injustice even though all significant political parties in India have been revealed as corrupt and communal. Charges of communal atrocities just don’t stick on the Congress for the same reasons that charges of corruption don’t stick on the BJP. Hazare is going to find out that this time he is suddenly not as contagious as in 2011.

But there is a triumph that the liberal media has won for the Congress in the recent months, which is to show farmers as a distressed community. Once you define someone as a vulnerable group, it is easy to show the BJP as a majoritarian villain. If Hazare’s latest fast was entirely dedicated to the cause of the farmers, he may have greater success.

Hazare may still have succeeded if he had one important quality of Gandhi. Gandhi was a part of the ruling social elite who had to masquerade as a poor man. He could set the agenda. The elite were with him. Hazare is not a part of the contemporary elite. Forget setting the agenda, he was probably used as an employee by a section of the middle class to bring Narendra Modi to power. His true loyal base is the impoverished small farmer.

I do believe though that Hazare does not contest elections for the same reasons as Gandhi—pride presented as disdain for electoral politics. But then the only way to sustain a political movement in India is by accepting that it is political.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist,most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





No men were harmed in the making of the Kondo legend


2019-02-10

It is inevitable: Marie Kondo will come home. She struck mine early. One evening, many months before she became the Netflix sensation that she has become today, I came home to find piles of garments belonging to my wife. “You have so much stuff,” I blurted out.

On any other day such an unwise comment would lead to an attempt to reform me once again into a man who owned shirts of various colours and material, and shoes for various occasions. After all, it is true that when I was 24, I was sent away from a press event because I was poorly dressed. Yet, I have improved only enough to be admitted into rooms.

However, that evening, my wife meekly accepted that I was right: she had too many things, too many clothes, too many shoes, too many objects whose names I didn’t know. She had been reading Kondo. I like Kondo.

What Kondo says is that the past is a clutter; thank clutter, and throw most of it out except that which will make you feel “as if the cells in your body are slowly rising”. On the Netflix show she says this with a spring and a yelp. She is actually talking to your wife, not you.

It is odd how the media postures that Kondo is someone who is important to both women and men. That is because it is respectable to convey the notion that tidying up is a responsibility of both men and women.

However, the fact is that the legend of Kondo is almost entirely a creation of deep female interest in her.

So here is what men should know about Kondo and about other things that will help you understand Kondo.

1. A revolutionary usually has a disorder, or a gift, or a capacity or a mental state to perform an action that can cause a revolution when many people who do not have the disorder or the gift or the capacity or the mental state try to imitate the revolutionary. The normal trying to imitate the abnormal—that is why the world is in a tumult. However, this is also what gives meaning to life.

Kondo is tumult and meaning. She is transmitting the most incorrect but powerful message that a gifted person can convey: “What I am is attainable to you.” Millions of women are trying to imitate her methods in their homes, which inevitably means they are drafting their husbands to be a part of the process.

2. If Kondo has come to your house, it means your marriage is good.

The Netflix show begins with a weeping woman and images of her husband’s fingers, which in documentary parlance means “tension”. However, Kondo is in reality about hope and the persistence of happiness.

The influence of Kondo will coerce you to fling your clothes in a heap in the middle of the room, hold an old T-shirt and ask yourself if the cells in your body are “slowly rising”. You will be coerced into tidying up a kitchen that you may think is actually tidy. However, all this is a sign of a healthy home. As Marx told us without telling us, the conflict is the whole point. Resolution is a plot device invented by bearded writers to end a book.

But remember Kondo, too, lies: “There will always be an end to tidying.”

3. Some of you may feel that after the abduction and disappearance of your cargo shorts, or the insults conveyed to you for wearing the most comfortable garment ever made, Kondo is the most powerful reminder of the fact that peace is a feminine world where there are rules and floral things and cups with small useless ears.

But Kondo is not unbeatable.

She makes two crucial mistakes. One is with books. In the first episode of the Netflix show, she shakes books to “wake them up”. She appliesher general rule to books:If they don’t spark joy throw them away, dooming many read books and most unread books.

This gives you the opportunity to bring the writer and mathematician Nassim Nicholas Taleb to the fight.

“Read books are far less valuable than unread ones,” he wrote in his widely read book, Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable. A good library is not a demonstration of how much we know but an “anti-library” that is an exhibition of what we do not know yet.

In the homes of genuine readers of books, it is unlikely that Kondo will prevail.

4. Also, she allows for sentimentality, which some people know means you get to keep all your junk. Kondo lets you keep useless things as long as they mean something to you, which invariably means things from the past. But then every single object from your present will be sentimental many decades later. This argument will let you keep almost anything you want if you have already demonstrated signs of sentimentality.

5. Kondo is not a rebuke of consumerism. She only shows the most wise form of materialism—austerity. Own great things, expensive things, but few things.

6. And if you wonder how the male version of Kondo would look like, I recommend another Netflix show: Queer Eye, in which a slob does not need to become a better person; he needs to just step out of his house, shop, allow himself to be groomed and drink, as five amiable gay men transform his home into something sex-worthy.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and novelist, most recent of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





A farce called objectivity is dead, and that’s great


2019-02-17

Some of you may be surprised to know that despite all the noise surrounding the Rafale aircraft, there is not a shred of evidence yet that its purchase is a financial scam. If this corroborates your conviction and a current of well-being has run through your body, you are on the side of Narendra Modi. If it irritates you, and your mind is searching for a clinching and futile rebuttal, then you are a person who wishes Modi to fail in the general elections. Journalists, too, are such simple people who belong to either of the two distinct camps, but they feel they must pretend to be “neutral”, which is a meaningless word to describe any human state.

Elsewhere, Donald Trump has exposed US intellectuals and the most hallowed brands of American journalism, like The New York Times, as being incapable of objectivity when things don’t go their way. They had consistently underestimated his popularity when he was running for president, and have since reported on his presidency with venom. Also, they have, with no substantive evidence, portrayed the power of Facebook as the reason why they could not exert any moral influence on the American voter.

We live in an age where regular people have come to believe that there is no objectivity anymore in journalism, literature, philosophy, formal conversations and in any medium that is supposed to transmit truth. Noble preachers who lament ‘echo chambers’ themselves are in echo chambers. At the same time, everyone who has something to say is working very hard to appear “objective”. Even as people increasingly find it hard to be “neutral”, they expect that everyone else is “objective” which is nothing more than a demand that you agree with them.

Objectivity is a farce. The expectation that a human being will report or analyze any event without being influenced by emotion is so ridiculous an idea that it is surprising the myth survived so long.

The word “observation”, which writers have invented to describe their skill, is comically pompous when you realize that writers actually do believe that an observation is an act of seeing. Many simpleton writers take this lie too far. About 10 years ago, the author of the novel Shantaram, Gregory David Roberts, in the newness of fame and the disorientation of being feted as a fine “observer” of people, told me that he goes to Mumbai’s Leopold restaurant and sits for hours “observing” people.

But observation is not the act of seeing. It is the corrupt memory of seeing.

What humans have always demonstrated is that most of them have no capacity to be objective, especially in affairs that truly affect them. The objective, in reality, are a rare personality type, like the flexible and the endurance runner.

Formal objectivity, as an exalted intellectual virtue, appears to be an ancient invention, a powerful decorum and a wise trick in communication that is meant to convey to the consumer of information that an observation has credibility. Until recent times, the respectable world of scholars and writers did appear objective, but that was because they had extraordinary powers to establish their prejudice as “objective reality”.

Today the democratization of voice has exposed intellectuals as people who are as biased as anyone else, but in journalism and academia, they still hold on to the farce of objectivity through some obsolete ruses.

The most common procedure is called “balance”. In that lame trick, you carry opposing voices of equal lengths in your report while all along believing in one view and eventually nudge the reader into trusting that view.

Objectivity is also achieved through ‘over-compensation’. You could see this phenomenon a few days ago in the aftermath of the terror attack in Kashmir. Liberals, who are usually attacked by nationalists for loving the idea of Islam more than the idea of India, made a special effort to issue strong condemnations of the attack. There was a time when only heads of state used to issue cliched statements of condemnation and condolence. Now intellectuals and journalists, too, do.

The phenomenon of overcompensation to appear “neutral” can also been seen in Muslim intellectuals who go to great lengths to condemn some low-hanging fruits of Islam.

However, the most potent transmission of objectivity occurs through the delusions of activists. They convey views and news that favour their patrons and harm their foes, but they do believe in their hearts that they are practising some pious form of objective journalism. Always, the best way to fool others is to first fool yourself.

Despite all these types of ‘objectivity’, in the perception of the general public for whom the masquerade is erected, objectivity is truly dead, chiefly in journalism. This is good, primarily because the end of a long farce in any sphere of activity can only lead to good things.

A lot of what passes off as journalism should ideally be categorized as the long tail of politics. Without the pretence of journalism and objectivity, activists can then achieve much more. They don’t have to expend energy tweaking things anymore to appear objective. They do not have to feel like charlatans deep inside them, or hire the delusional to achieve their ends. Also, overtly biased lament is in art territory. AND, there is no conductor of ideas more powerful than art.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’.





The rich can make great art on poverty but can’t end it


2019-02-24

Unlike the contemporary Indian maid, who is on her fours when she mops the floor, even if the floor belongs to a conscientious liberal, a maid in the Mexico City of the early 1970s was given the luxury of a long-handle mop. This we see in the film Roma, a memoir of its director and producer Alfonso Cuarón.

The film, which is set in Cuarón’s childhood in Roma, a suburb of Mexico City, recounts a year in the life of a maid named Cleo. As in an affluent Indian home of today, everyone in little Cuarón’s household, including Cleo, assumes that she is invisible. But Cleo is in a much better place than a typical Indian maid of today.

She can sit on chairs and sofas, even on armrests. She gets whole days off and she is allowed dating, love and lovers. When she is pregnant, her boss herself takes her to see a doctor. There are bars where Cleo can go to dance with the poor. She does not need the masquerade of pilgrimage to have fun. Also, once the lady of the house tells Cleo what she would tell an equal woman: “No matter what they tell you—women, we are always alone.”

It appears that a Mexican maid was widely regarded as a human.

I trust Cuarón’s depiction of a maid of that time in the Roma of the 1970s, but that is not because she is the subject of a slow art house film which has the time to show how a boiled egg is peeled. As an Indian who has suffered many films where the water boils forever as a woman slowly combs her hair and other such works of fraud by Indians that naive foreigners imagined was “reality”, I know it is stupid to attach authenticity to a story just because nothing much happens in it.

I trust Cuarón because I have read accounts of Mexicans who do. Also, it is very important for the talented rich in a poor nation to take great pains to portray the poor with tenderness, craft and honesty.

In Gully Boy, an exquisite film by Zoya Akhtar, the setting of the Muslim lower-middle class in Mumbai is as authentic. Usually the portrayal of India’s roughness by urbane filmmakers, with the dramatic dialects and expletives, is as fictitious as Karan Johar’s imagination of curtains in a poor Indian home. But Gully Boy has a good grasp over the props of poverty and the rage of a talented boy embedded in it who has no recourse to useful parents, even though Akhtar herself is so favoured.

In an extremely poor society, the poor have a profound effect on the rich. It is hard for the most intelligent artists among the affluent to isolate themselves from the poor. Their soft heart creates beautiful art. But the soft heart of the rich, when it seeps out of art, is economically and politically useless; it is even harmful.

Empathy, which creates remarkable novels and films, is also the most powerful front for the middle class and the rich to influence economics and politics, and destroy ideas that make them uncomfortable. Hidden within empathy is the full force of self-obsession and self-interest.

Every Indian who is not poor is a poverty-alleviation expert. They have views on what the poverty line should be; whether the universal basic income is a good idea; how redistribution of wealth will end poverty; how the invisible hand of capitalism will end poverty. But what has reduced poverty in India is something else.

In Roma, one Professor Zovek appears in a dramatic scene, dressed in spandex. He is a cult figure for a group of right-wing youth who stand in geometric formations and train by waving sticks (does that sound familiar?). He did exist once. Very little is known of him but what interested me was that he was from an affluent family who wished to be a revolutionary.

Zovek was yet another man who was born to wealth in a poor nation, who deployed his soft heart and social equity to achieve the most common attempt at poverty alleviation—recruit the poor to fight authority on his behalf. How many times have we seen this?

Nationalists who hate communists; intellectuals who hate nationalists; all of them fighting each other through prescriptions of best poverty-alleviation methods. In the end, such revolutions end very badly for the poor.

Gully Boy hints at another powerful creation of the soft heart of the rich—the myth that college education will save the poor. The reality is that education is the way in which the elite preserve their club. For an overwhelming majority of the poor, college education is a waste of time and money. In the case of the film’s impoverished rapper, the sacred Indian religion of college degree and its promise of a dull job is a plain evil that almost robs him of his future in music.

The people who have proved to be the most useful to India’s poor have always been those who wished to overtly profit by transforming their lives—non-banking financial companies that replaced street moneylenders; cellphone manufacturers who made cheap computers; telecom tycoons who have made calls almost free; social media billionaires. And, politicians who will do anything to win elections, including actually doing good.

The American filmmaker and poet, Jonas Mekas, who died last month said, “In the very end, civilizations perish because they listen to their politicians and not to their poets.” This is a complete lie. If only people knew the true character of all the poets and all the politicians; they will probably stop reading poetry but they will still vote.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’.





India’s devout Muslims show our assumptions are wrong


2019-03-03

Some honest tributes can be great insults. As in the case of an old compliment that has come to haunt Indian Muslims in this season of terror and mojo.

The tribute is often conveyed as a gracious question: Considering the apparent power of Islam to convert some people into terrorists, “why are Indian Muslims not radicalized?’’ Among the people who answer the question for us are acclaimed scholars, diplomats, politicians, writers and journalists. Their answers are wrong. The question itself is foolish. But the foolishness of the question is not the reason why the answers are wrong.

Most of India’s 180 million Muslims are poor, semi-literate, driven into ghettos and very devout, conditions in which global scholars have claimed Muslims demonstrate dangerous properties.

How many people per million in a community have to join a terror group for that society to be deemed ‘‘radicalized’’? There is, of course, no helpful global standard, but the consensus among scholars, diplomats and politicians is that India’s Muslims are not “radicalized”.

Very few Indian Muslims outside Kashmir have been involved in acts of terror. In the glory days of Al Qaeda, the terror network failed to draw in Indians. A confidential report prepared in 2015 by the intelligence agencies of several nations suggested that even the Islamic State thought Indian Muslims were lousy at terror, especially in the total commitment and suicide-bombing departments. In the first place, Islamic State could lure very few Indians. Various reports on the number of Indians who joined ISIS agree that the figure is in the region of 100.

India is this way, according to David Heyman, a former US assistant secretary for homeland security, because “India was born a multicultural, multi-ethnic, multi-denominational society that embraces that diversity”. This is a common view among scholars who bloviate on the subject. “India has been a model of inclusiveness,” the US ambassador to India then, Richard Verma, told journalists when asked why few Indian Muslims have joined the Islamic State.

If an Indian Muslim laughs at all this, it is because of his circumstances. He has memories of riots, and those whom he regards as perpetrators have grown in political stature. After the recent escalation of India-Pakistan tensions, a Muslim mother tweeted that her two children are being asked by their schoolmates to go “back to Pakistan”.

Even before the recent tensions, every now and then, a politician or government official would ask Muslims who are unhappy with India to “go to Pakistan”. In the past few weeks, Indian Muslims burned Pakistani flags, a show of patriotism Hindus do not have to perform.

About 20 years ago, I had gone around the posh parts of south Mumbai, claiming to be “Mohammed Khan’’ from Kerala looking to pay an atrocious rent for a flat but every time a Hindu landlord would learn of my name, his demeanour would change and, of course, the deal would fall through.

The idea that India is ‘’inclusive’’ is promoted by people who are never in a position to know how India excludes. The pious nonsense of India being “multicultural, multi-ethnic…” cannot be the reason why Indian Muslims “are not radicalized”.

What then could be the reason? Scholars and visiting diplomats do point to the fact that Indian Muslims are lucky to be in a democracy, and ‘‘have a voice’’. However, the Muslim representation in politics has been declining. The current Lok Sabha has the lowest Muslim representation since 1957.

Over the years, since the rise of Al Qaeda, several explanations for the moderateness of Indian Muslims have leaned on the fact that the prosperity of the nation in the past two decades has deepened the sense of Indian identity among Muslims. This is not a spurious reason, but there is much that it does not explain. How, for instance, have Muslims remained moderate in the face of politically profitable religious violence and social insults, and the stagnation of Muslims in poverty even as other communities have done better.

India’s politicians take credit for the innocuous nature of the average Indian Muslim as though they have put in place some cunning intelligence network. What India does not have the heart to state is that it is safe not because of some grand sophisticated spy shield but because the nation’s first line of defence is made up of ordinary Muslims. At the first sign of suspicious outsiders or activities, the local Muslims alert the police. India has faced very few terror attacks, not in spite of its Muslims but because of them.

The reason why the question ‘‘why are Indian Muslims not violently radicalized?’’ is daft is in the surprise implied in the question. It makes an assumption that Muslims in certain conditions will turn violent—that the poor and the illiterate are innately more prone to violence than highly educated scholars. What India’s devout Muslims show is that this assumption is wrong. What they show is that most of humanity, no matter what its disenchantments and provocations, does not wish to kill.

I propose a new assumption. What if religious terrorism, like extreme activism, is a symbiosis of handlers and the miserable, which includes the mentally ill? If this assumption is a fact, we can ask why is it that in some regions of the world, sadists and psychopaths are able to recruit the vulnerable. That, I believe, is the correct question. Not “why 180 million human beings are so human in India’’.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist,most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’.





Modi should not speak in English when he goes South


2019-03-10

Every time Narendra Modi travels South he becomes “Peter”. That is what Tamilians in Chennai call any Indian who speaks in English.

Modi has been giving long political speeches in English at mass rallies in the South. The fact is someone of his provenance does not have to speak in English anymore every time he goes to the region. There is something ludicrous about an Indian Prime Minister and nationalistic mass leader speaking in English to the poorest Indians.

On a scale of absurdity, it is on par with Richard Attenborough’s Gandhi inciting impoverished Indians in English to rise against the British.

Modi gives speeches in English in the South because he believes what he has been told—that South Indians hate Hindi so much they prefer being spoken to in English.

I was raised in Chennai and I used to speak and think in Tamil, though I did hope in English. Until my adolescence, the language I was most fluent in was Tamil. But then, as part of seeking a better life, I decided to improve my dismal spoken English. Eventually I became one of those Nehruvian Indians who are stranded in English, who do not speak any language well.

In the Chennai of the 1980s, it was fashionable for some people who were actually very articulate in Tamil to pretend that their Tamil was poor. They did not watch Tamil films in theatres unless it was made by Mani Ratnam or starred Kamal Haasan. The attitudes have changed. Today, Tamilians, like other Indians, are proud of everything that belongs them, everything that is home.

The new multifarious layers of the Indian middle class do not venerate English as much as the youth of previous generations. Indian languages are becoming cool. The mother tongue is becoming cool. The new affluent, the fashionable, the beautiful and the intelligent are not anglicized anymore. Provincial cricketers are expressing their intelligence in Hindi in a way a Sachin Tendulkar or a Virender Sehwag could not because they were forced by some unspoken decorum to speak in tortured English.

There can be no doubt that English is still the most useful language in India for material prospects, but that has only revealed it as a symbol of inequality. India rewards mediocrity as long as it knows how to speak in English. How can such a symbol be politically useful? It appears that even Scheduled Castes have given up on English.

Various movements of the historically oppressed, across India, saw in English a thug who could stand up to the formidable cultural thugs that emerged from Sanskrit. An activist even tried to build a temple for English, with a presiding English goddess, a bronze figure in robes, wearing a wide-brimmed hat and holding aloft a pen. One activist told me that the mantra that will be chanted would be: “A,B,C,D…” It was a melodramatic adoration of a language that promised to help the marginalized bypass Indian culture.

However, many Indians realized, after spending a lot of hard-earned money and pawning their gold, that it is not enough for English to be taught in schools. Children need to be born into an Anglicized environment. There was no point in learning a language poorly. English, they realized, was as villainous as Sanskrit.

Modi himself has risen because of his proficiency in two Indian languages. As a good orator he probably knows how bad he sounds in English. However, as a politician with very high stakes, he does not wish to challenge the theory that it will be suicidal for a politician to deliver a speech in Hindi anywhere in the South.

It is a theory that emerges from the time of Indira Gandhi when Dravidian politics had whipped up Tamil nationalism by casting Hindi as the new colonizing agent. Those days, every time Indira Gandhi visited Tamil Nadu, she would speak in English and a lean man would translate it into beautiful Tamil, an act that would elevate him politically and we would eventually know him as P. Chidambaram.

There were some tense days. Once, someone threw a crude bomb into Chennai’s Hindi Prachar Sabha, an organization that aims to spread Hindi in southern states. Around that time I used to go to that building to study Hindi and my mother had said that I must not tell the bus conductor I was going to the Sabha. She said I must tell him I am going to a cinema near the Sabha. All through the bus journey the conductor rebuked me for going to the movies instead of studying. Unable to bear it all, I thought I will risk death and I announced to the bus that I was actually going to the Hindi Prachar Sabha. No one tried to kill me. I don’t believe even in those days the hatred for Hindi was ever a real emotional issue on the streets.

Modi should really consider the simplicity and aesthetics of speaking in Hindi. Crack some self-deprecatory jokes about how bad his Tamil is, how bad his English is, and speak in Hindi. He will not need an interpreter as long as he does not use words like pracheen. Average Tamil voters understand simple Hindi better than they do English. There will certainly be some political drama-queens who will lament this, but they would be inconsequential.

If he wants to be very safe, maybe he should try speaking in Gujarati using an inconspicuous person with no political ambitions to interpret it in Tamil. It is a small price to pay to liberate himself from the inessential indignity of English.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’.





The prickly question of whether voting is a moral act


2019-03-18

Afew days ago, a radio jockey pranked a man in Mumbai. He posed as a representative of a travel company and offered a deal on a vacation in the last week of April. When the man took the bait, the jockey asked him if he was certain that he wished to go on a vacation on 29 April, which he soon revealed as the voting day in Mumbai. The jockey then revealed his true identity and rebuked the man in front of all of Mumbai for his disregard for the sacred day.

The sanctimonious jockey is part of a large mass of people who venerate voting. On voting day, there will be thousands of Instagram pictures of Indians showing their forefingers with the stated or unspoken claim that they have done something noble. Also, there will certainly be one viral photograph of a very old bent woman who had travelled a great distance to vote.

Voting is consecrated in our age, but is voting a moral act?

When people say in public why they vote, they make it seem as though they vote for virtuous things. But what exactly do they do in the privacy of the booth? If we look at the history of Indian elections, we see that the reasons why most Indians voted are these: They had accepted bribes in the form of money and liquor to vote for dangerous men; they voted for corrupt men because such characters seemed capable and street smart; they also voted for the supremacy of their caste and they voted to harm or restrain other communities and religions. They voted to defeat suave people though the suave people seemed nice and meant well. Generally, Indians voted for murderers, rapists and thieves, for the type of men who have to be herded in buses and hidden in resorts by their handlers to keep them from been bought like horses by rival political parties.

The general public, the people who speak of the great virtuous forces that impel them to vote, have always in private elected some of the worst human beings that ever lived. On the other hand, by mass majoritarian will, a man like B.R. Ambedkar, one of the creators of the Indian Constitution and among the most intelligent and earnest men of his time, lost elections twice.

Voting is also a response of the people to expensively transmitted lies and malice. Any speech today by any politician is filled with misinformation and venom because the strategy works. It is foolish to blame politicians. You cannot first invent and venerate electoral democracy and then accuse politicians of being political. Activists and journalists, too, are political workers who contribute to the lies and venom. In the end, everybody agrees, most voters will vote under the influence of diabolic storytelling. How moral then can voting be?

The elite, by their very nature, are few in number but exert a disproportionate influence on voters by controlling activism and influencing journalism through which they then transmit gloom and fear. Their greatest political success is in creating the notion that we are going through times that are dark, angry and insane, which are intrinsic qualities of social activists but not the nature of our age or the world at all. The world is mostly banal and hopeful, until it switches on the media.

In India, as in most parts of the world, the elite and the masses have never wished for the same things. For instance, the Nehruvian elite are afflicted with paranoia over privacy and detest Aadhaar. However, the vast poor see in Aadhaar, despite its glitches, a transformational force. The People’s Archive Of Rural India, a journal that is devoted to rural India founded by journalist and activist P. Sainath, recently lamented how people with leprosy can be a part of Aadhaar. Actually, there are provisions in the Aadhaar system for those who do not have fingers, but that is beside the point. Activists who ask how biometrics will help such people are just searching for a lament. By their own logic, these activists must question all of electoral democracy because someone with leprosy will find it very hard to use a voting machine.

The attack on Aadhaar by India’s paranoid socialistic elite almost succeeded in sabotaging the project. Meanwhile, the new anti-Nehruvian corporate elite has been pushing the idea that when they get even richer, some sweet crumbs will fall on the poor, so let’s build sexy highways instead of giving away loan waivers.

In effect, when an upper-class Indian goes to vote, or when you go to vote, to be precise, you are probably walking to defeat the will of a poor person. Take for instance the hypermoral activist, Arundhati Roy, who stated recently that she prefers “the chaos” of the Mahagathbandhan, an arrangement of corrupt and inefficient parties, over Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s stability. What if the fact is that the Bharatiya Janata Party’s stability is more beneficial to the urban poor than “the chaos” that Roy truly prefers? She may not require the government, or political stability, to continue to thrive, but the poor do. Imagine the moment when Roy or Sainath cast their vote. They will likely be performing, however futile, an act that is intended to defeat the will of those who are poorer than them. What can be more amoral than the upper class going to vote?

There is one great virtue in voting. Consciously or subconsciously, people take responsibility for the miseries of their nation. After all, they had elected inefficient and corrupt people. Hence the probability of violent revolutions in an electoral democracy is small. However, that is not why people vote. They do not vote to own up their mistakes. They vote because their foes have a vote.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist,most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’.





The invisible hand of humanitarian activism


2019-03-24

Are activists better people than us? Why do they fight for the welfare of impoverished farmworkers? Why do they dedicate their lives to protect forests and tribals from corporate miners? Why do cable-held bridges across shallow seas remind them that humanity is in a crisis? What does their dedication to the miserable say about most of us who merely pursue our craft with diligence and take care of our families?

No one asks why people do noble things. We are trained to believe that it is a fundamental property in humans and that activists have more evolved faculties of empathy. But if we keep staring at the good folks, their halos dim. They are lawyers whose prime time debates drive their private practice, journalists who receive career-saving grants from wealthy Nehruvian philanthropists who dislike the rise of vernacular strongmen, and artistically limited academics and writers who find respect in the safe refuge of righteousness.

Practical people, the executive class for instance, point to this assembly of noble activists and accuse them of hypocrisy. Some activists themselves admit the charge. They accept that they despise inequality but do send their ordinary children to expensive American universities. They admit to many other “contradictions”. A contradiction is hypocrisy in good people. Practical people point to the dichotomy between the public postures and private actions of activists and declare that the good folks are inherently useless. This is a wrong analysis.

Activists are highly useful to society—not because they are noble, but because they are selfish. The defence of activists lies in the very defence of all of capitalism—“the invisible hand”.

It is a phrase that is today associated with the 18th century economist Adam Smith. He first used it to make fun of religions that did not resemble Christianity, but the phrase is more serious in his 1759 classic, The Theory Of Moral Sentiments. The phrase and its exaggerated modern interpretations underpin theories that explain why capitalism works and why it is moral. Smith’s “invisible hand” leads the selfish rich to perform accidental collateral good deeds. “…Thus without intending it, without knowing it, [they] advance the interest of the society”.

The idea is that through our selfish acts, we end up expanding the economy and doing good more efficiently than altruism. Selfish acts also fund the greatest do-gooder of all, the government. Isn’t it true that in any loan waiver to poor farmers, there is a bigger contribution from the reviled young banker than the pious rural activist?

The economist Thomas Piketty told me in an interview that he is not so bothered by the near absence of philanthropy in India. For the welfare of the poor, according to him, the tax paid by the rich is superior to philanthropy. If we scale down the characters in this analysis, we can argue that a tax-paying youth who is led by Smith’s invisible hand is far more beneficial to society than the conscientious young person who would love Piketty.

But the noble, too, are led by the invisible hand. The origins of activism lie in an old elite’s loss of privileges once a new elite takes over. Old-money millionaires accuse new billionaires of corruption because these billionaires have made it expensive to be rich in India. The old urbane elite of journalism accuse the profession’s new provincial elite of being loud and reverential. Mohandas Gandhi himself rebelled in South Africa once he found he would not be accorded a white man’s status.

Also, the affluent require meaning in their otherwise pointless lives. There can be no greater meaning than the feudalism of serving those who are weaker.

So altruism is the same thing as selfishness. It is the same invisible hand of self-interest that leads activists, especially those who do not have serious mental illnesses. Their selfishness and their war to preserve their prestige, all masqueraded as a natural force of goodness, creates streams of information, reassures the marginalized that someone cares for them, delays degradation of the environment and creates political opposition to powerful companies.

There are economists who do not like Adam Smith’s “invisible hand”. They argue that human selfishness would achieve nothing without the regulatory force of compassion, like government, for example.

I imagine that in their view, Smith’s “invisible hand” is very similar to Diego Maradona’s “hand of god”. During a quarter final of the 1986 football World Cup, the Argentine legend Maradona used his hand to score a fraudulent goal, which he later described as a goal scored “a little with the head of Maradona and a little with the hand of God”. The mystical hand is so often an intervention of lethargic immorality that is attributed to a higher force.

Scholars such as the anthropologist David Graeber and the economist Joseph Stiglitz who do not admire “the invisible hand” point to the power of altruism. Stiglitz reminds us that many technologies emerged from government projects, like the internet itself. But then isn’t it true that politicians, bureaucrats and scientists themselves are impelled by selfish reasons, making their altruism accidental? There is self-interest that creates capitalism, and self-interest that creates humanitarianism.

Stiglitz is wrong when he says Smith’s hand is invisible because “it is often not there”. There is not one but two invisible hands that run the world.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’.





A theory about the sudden rise of Nitin Gadkari


2019-04-01

I believe that there are only four kinds of people: the philosopher, the fan, the actor and the builder.

The philosopher is under the spell of intuition that makes him or her see clearly through the smog of scholarship. Intuition is not a mystical force. It emerges from subterranean knowledge but does not require excessive information. The primary quality of intuition is that it is truth, or an opinion, that precedes substantiation. Philosophers are usually found in mathematics, science and literature, but very rarely among people who are known as philosophers.

The actor is a person who can project a myth and in whom others can see what they wish to see. He is the art whose true nature is that he is its canvass. He is also an onion. The peels are the substance. Examples of the actor are successful mass politicians, top salaried managers of a corporation, many writers, some people in the organized compassion business and singers.

At this point I wish to reassure you that this column is about Nitin Gadkari, who is a beloved of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), and the central minister for road transport and highways, shipping and water resources, river development and Ganga rejuvenation, a man who has been enjoying a sudden and mysterious rise in political stature these past few weeks.

However, I have to first tell you about the fan. The fan is the receiver, patron, consumer, conformist and the most efficient transmitter of all human achievements and delusions. Struck by the greatness of some philosophers, actors and builders, the fan imitates them and becomes an imposter.

Now we come to Gadkari who is an example of the builder. A builder is consumed by the idea of creating giant objects, grand things. The true modern builder shares some traits with ancient builders across all cultures. Building grand beautiful things is expensive, so they have to invent good reasons to build, which they find in two powerful stories that might even be true. One is that building is good business and the other is that building is moral.

For many years, Gadkari has been a builder who claimed moral reasons to perform his art—the public good. He was popular in Nagpur, but beyond that, he was never a mass leader who could influence elections. He was, as journalist Rajdeep Sardesai told him in March, “an Upper House leader”. But now something is changing. A huge cut-out is being crafted by an unseen force that is presenting him as a man who has built great expressways and ports, and who will transform the infrastructure of the nation.

In the past few weeks, he has allowed and been granted considerable attention by the media, to the extent that in the perception of the urban middle-class, he is the second most noticeable leader of the Bharatiya Janata Party, just below Narendra Modi but above Amit Shah. Political journalists have promoted the idea that the RSS is readying Gadkari in the eventuality that the party does not win a majority and needs to woo new allies. Then this agreeable man will be presented as the prime ministerial candidate instead of Modi.

How did a builder become more agreeable than an actor? The manner in which Gadkari has presented himself in recent weeks is significant for the fact that he spoke like a builder. For long in Indian politics, actors have won elections and builders have quietly got things done. However, it now appears that Gadkari knows the time has come for the builder. Indians are finally willing to accept the morality of building.

Of late, this is what Gadkari has said on various platforms: That Priyanka Gandhi could sail on the Ganga and drink the sacred river’s water because he cleaned it and that very soon, Indians will be able to travel from Delhi to Bangladesh on a network of rivers. That the whole nation should have only concrete roads and that he is at the helm of so much infrastructural work that 40% of the cement produced by the nation is consumed by his ministries. That corporate defaulters are not always frauds and that a salaried man will never understand the pressures of business. That when we build, we must think a hundred years ahead. That he has commissioned work worth “ ₹16 lakh crores”, yet no contractor had to visit his office, and that he is a straight-talking man who once told “a million Muslims” that he would like to have their votes but they should know that he is essentially a “chaddiwala”.

He appeared in several forums this month as he usually appears, in shirt and trousers, underrated modern political garments, which are emerging as a sign of either honesty or efficiency. He spoke with a command over detail that politicians usually don’t demonstrate: “1kg of CNG is equal to 1.3 litres of diesel”; “if you harvest human waste you can separate methane, which can be used to make biofuel”.

He also conveyed that as a builder, he plays politics only during election time and that he has an excellent relationship with a spectrum of politicians, including Arvind Kejriwal. There are images of the two getting along fine, both in shirts of the same size.

The favourable public perception of Gadkari in Modi’s bastions points to some simple facts: Most Indians, even in big metros, are villagers when it comes to infrastructure and they are in awe of giant swanky projects. Also, as a nation progresses, it is not only the actor who can win elections. Even the builder can.

The ultimate goal of democracy, though, is to make the philosopher win.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’.





What Modi’s poetry says about him and about poetry


2019-04-07

In one of his poems, Narendra Modi is a kite, who is soaring with “the grace of the sky”, towards the sun, held back “only by the string”. In another poem, he is a honeybee who is very busy, joyful, free, and his life a burst of colours. In his poems, he is often happy and in good places. Also, he is an energetic lover, “an ocean that leaps with energy”, a man who is as “upright as a mountain” and as “pure as the river”.

Modi has said about his poetry that he does not consider it “an extraordinary literary creation”. I have no quarrels with that.

Poems do not always reveal the poet—the reason why many poets are still loved. Modi’s poems, some of which have been translated from Gujarati into English by his friend Ravi Mantha, may not reveal who he really is, but they do show a broad personality type, a sort of man who thrives in the physical world but is usually doomed in literature.

He venerates the idea of strength and has disdain for the idea of weakness. The disdain is not for misery, but for surrendering to it. He rates joy superior to melancholy, even in poetry. The reason this type of person is doomed in literature is that the arts are a flea market of frailties—the only sphere of human activity that has special reverence for human weakness, miseries, defeats and fears. Beauty in art is like the sweet gloom in a lullaby. Here, joy is too light, too trivial, and “clever” is not a compliment. Language itself may have risen to mourn the primordial confusion of an exquisite brain that can do a bit too much in a world that has no meaning. As the writer J. M. Coetzee’s character speculates in the novel Disgrace, “…the origins of speech lie in song, and the origins of song in the need to fill out with sound the overlarge and rather empty human soul”. Art’s defence of its laments is formidable, but this quality of art does not enslave many intelligent people. For a particular reason. There are people who venerate strength and joy, and those who venerate vulnerabilities and misery. They despise each other.

Over the past few days hundreds of artists, whose moral pedestals are their artistic crutches, have been signing petitions asking people to defeat Modi. They behave in this manner because they are in reality his literary rivals. The two personality types are not defined by innate traits. Rather, they are creations of circumstance. For instance, a man in the mainstream of society who is placed well to excel in the material world may believe that he is reaping the rewards of superior genes, a superior religion and an exuberant joyous outlook. On the other hand, those who are underdogs in any given situation develop great respect for human wounds, elevating them to human nature.

Literature is in the sway of the second group. They have natural advantages in storytelling. Readers are self-obsessed. Often they are searching for themselves in every page of every story ever told. And miseries are more memorable than soaring kites and happy honey-bees. There is a reason for this. If I may paraphrase Leo Tolstoy, all happy people are alike; every unhappy person is unhappy in his own way. Joy is banal and uniform, while misery is diverse and interesting. As a result those who are on the side of strength are no match for those who can linger on fragility and melancholy.

This is the reason I wish there were a special category of literary awards for the sort of writer who is truly at a disadvantage—the happy upper-caste family man, the reliable bore who will never hurt his children, who has no mental, physical or social problems, and who does not ingest any narcotic substance, and who takes on all adversities standing akimbo, if not spitting on the palms and slapping his thighs. It appears that the way we must live life is not what we must celebrate when we write.

The fact is, even though I am on the side of the strong, the writers I relish are on the other side. Wisława Szymborska, for instance. In her poem, Hitler’s First Photograph, she writes:

“And who’s this little fellow in his itty-bitty robe?

That’s tiny baby Adolf, the Hitlers’ little boy

Will he grow up to be an LL.D?

Or a tenor in Vienna’s Opera House?

Whose teensy hand is this, whose little ear and eye and nose?

Whose tummy full of milk, we just don’t know…

Precious little angel, mommy’s sunshine, honey bun.”

A few weeks ago, after a man shot down over 49 Muslims in New Zealand, and a newspaper ran a photograph of him as a child, marvelling at his “angelic face”, there was much outrage against the paper. But Szymborska had shown, long ago, through an intellectually superior veneration of tenderness, that a killer is primarily a tragic figure, and the most tragic thing about a murderer is that he was once an angelic infant, “mommy’s sunshine, honey bun”.

There are tender moments in Modi’s poems, but even they are a tribute to himself, like the time when he cried at the headquarters of Facebook in 2015 while recounting his journey from a difficult childhood to becoming an alpha male. There are, of course, writers who can make an invocation of pride and strength pure literature. For instance, this sentence in one of V. S. Naipaul’s novels: “The world is what it is; men who are nothing, who allow themselves to become nothing, have no place in it.” This, if you take away all its beauty, is the central message in Modi’s poems, too.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed and Dangerous’.





Science and faith are not as different as we often think


2019-04-15

I used to think that no one really believes in God because if people did, as they claimed, wouldn’t they be in a perpetual stupor, stunned by the existence of such a magical force? However, I don’t hold that view anymore after observing how people have responded to recent claims of extraordinary scientific discoveries that are almost as mystical as God and more photogenic. People marvel at the announcement for a few minutes, believe it completely, then they go back to hating or loving Kanhaiya Kumar.

Why don’t people faint and the traffic stop when scientists announce that they have proof that gravity alters time, that they now know where mass comes from, or that they have conclusive evidence of the existence of black holes—objects so dense that a whole star is compressed into a blob just a few hundred metres across and where the gravitational force is so strong nothing will ever escape it, not even light?

The last pronouncement, about visual evidence of the black hole phenomenon, occurred on Wednesday. A black hole is now a scientific truth because of three main reasons: One, people with great authority, who have monopoly over a narrow field of study, have said so after an arcane process that is widely believed to be very rigorous; two, other people like them have endorsed it; three, most people in the world, including scientists in other fields, do not have enough information to challenge the assertion. Also, the kind of people, such as journalists, writers and politicians, who usually seed doubt in the minds of people even in areas like genetics and climate do not believe they can challenge scientists on theoretical physics.

Theoretical physics thus also demonstrates qualities of medieval religion. In a world where everything has become political and every claim is questioned, many branches of science have not survived. But theoretical physics leaps from claim to claim with the ease of an ancient religion at its peak.

What I enjoy the most about science as a lay person is that it is a simulation of religion for me. I have no choice but to accept what is told to me by an authority who has the right halo. In every other sphere of knowledge, my reading is punctuated by constant arguments with ideas. But in the presence of scientific knowledge, even when I find it hard to believe in black holes, I cannot help but quieten my mind. The black hole has a familiar arc in the recent history of knowledge. First, an entertaining idea emerges from a mathematical equation; a purely theoretical structure is created when the variables in the equation are pushed to the extreme. Then a group of influential scientists believe it really exists in the physical world. They popularise its exotic properties by dumbing down language. The world is fascinated, including a whole generation of children. Artists then “render” stunning images. Some people then make films that feature the exotic phenomenon. Funds pour into the search for proof of the phenomenon. Eventually scientists find it, and it is remarkably almost exactly what they had hoped to find; it is very close to artistic renderings, too. And “a scientific truth” is born. Then it becomes religion. More powerful than conventional religion because it has the halo of knowledge, information, rationality and proof. Theoretical physics is probably one of the best funded religions.

Twenty-four hours after the news broke about the black hole in the heart of the Messier 87 (M87) galaxy, it was already blasphemous to ask, “But do black holes really exist?”

The idea of the black hole emerges from Albert Einstein’s equations that define his general theory of relativity. He never liked the idea. Even though his concepts led to much of today’s exotic science, he himself was suspicious of esoteric things. But in time scientists began to take black holes seriously.

Regular people, when they were not watching “sci-fi”, did not care much about black holes. Even on Thursday what contributed to the transmission of the news was not the power of science but of politics—of feminism.

In 2016, the computer scientist Katie Bouman, who is a key member of the team that photographed the M87 black hole, delivered a TED talk on a technique she developed to take the image. But that technique was eventually not used in the mission. Yet, hours after the image of the black hole was revealed, she emerged as the face of the project. As The New York Times reported, “In their eagerness to celebrate her…many non-scientists on social media overstated her role in what was a group effort by hundreds of people, creating an exaggerated impression…”

It is not surprising that people can argue about the exact role of a young woman in a scientific breakthrough, but not the scientific phenomenon itself. The image was created by a technology that used an array of radio telescopes located in various parts of the Earth to form a virtual telescope that could, “read a newspaper in New York from a sidewalk café in Paris”, according to an official release. The process is too complicated for lay people to challenge. Theoretical physics today is where most spheres of human intellect were just a few years ago: what a group of experts said was the truth.

It will be fascinating to watch what happens when one day theoretical physics, too, ceases to be a religion, and the amateur heretics are able to transmit their ideas widely. It would be hilarious if in the end cow urine turns out to be good for health, and there are no black holes.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist,most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’.





How the old elite managed to co-opt Kanhaiya Kumar


2019-04-21

A few years ago, the Indian edition of Vogue ran a fashion spread that featured poor Indians holding expensive objects, including a Burberry umbrella and an Hermes Birkin bag. Outrageerupted across India—chiefly from the Zara constituency, where most of the righteous exist, but also the Hermes crowd. In August last year, they may have seen another image of a poor Indian holding a luxury item, but they were not offended. In fact, they loved it. It was a photograph of 31-year-old Kanhaiya Kumar standing with his mother holding a bound copy of his “African Studies” doctoral thesis.

At first glance, it is a happy photograph. He was submitting his thesis to his mother who, he tweeted, “never let poverty interfere with my dreams”.

Embedded in this happy photograph is also a sad image if we know how to frame it. A bright young man from a poor family, who had no interest in science or mathematics, was compelled by an omnipresent elite influence to invest the best years of his life in higher education in the luxury streams of humanities. He first graduated in geography, and devoted his twenties to a doctorate at Jawaharlal Nehru University, which often serves as the refuge of arts students who want to escape adult life.

What Nehruvians call an aspiration of the poor is in reality co-option by the rich. The poor, especially the smart, are always co-opted into systems where the rich hold all the cards. That is how the rich win. It is cruel that Kanhaiya’s thesis must be titled The Process Of Decolonization And Social Transformation In South Africa. For what he had surrendered to, by pursuing the mythical prestige of a doctoral thesis, was a form of colonization in itself.

It would be unspeakably foolish to think that knowledge is meant for the rich alone, but there is something about the formal pursuit of degrees in the humanities that is wasteful if you are a very poor man.

A few months ago, Kanhaiya Kumar said that Narendra Modi was an “incompetent” son. It is possible that Kanhaiya’s mother does not think that of her own son, though his protracted education did not alter the fact that she was and still is a poor woman.

Most of us who were not dealt a good hand in our lives devoted our twenties to finding ways to prosper. We stood in queues in post offices to send money to our mothers, and one day we wondrously wired the same. Kanhaiya Kumar, though, was in African Studies, and he was immersed in student politics, whose relationship with real life is that of tennis-ball cricket to a test-match.

But then isn’t it true that Kanhaiya Kumar has succeeded? If it were not for the long asylum of JNU and its student politics, where he was elected president of the students union, he may have become a nameless underpaid journalist who is co-opted by activism, which is journalism at a 50% discount. And what is so great about becoming a call-centre employee or another kind of a corporate slave?

Instead, today Kanhaiya Kumar is a man who has some sway over millions of poor Indians. He says humane things in Hindi, a language that has, in recent times, become a medium of facile aggression and hatred. And he says it all like a stand-up comedian. He is a comedian who is not called a comedian, a writer who is not considered a writer, a theatre actor who is not known as an actor. People underestimate how powerful it is to be what the world does not think you are. He is also a politician who is not fully identified as a politician. All this happened because he surrendered to co-option by old elites in the humanities.

But then, the accident of his success, the accident of a foolish move by the Modi government that converted Kanhaiya Kumar into a martyr and brought national attention to his exquisite oratorial skills, masks a bleak truth. There are hundreds of thousands of smart young men like him who are co-opted into systems that limit their lives, or even deeply harm them.

The late Rohith Vemula, once a student of the University of Hyderabad, is an example of a boy who did not make it. Though he wished to be a science writer, he abandoned microbiology for sociology, an academic discipline that appears to be a nest of melancholic left-wing activism. He did not realize that the negativity of the left in India is merely the grouse of one set of elites who have lost their prestige to another set of elites. They transmit a lot of negativity but then go back to their aesthetic spaces. Boys like Vemula return to their depressing hostel rooms that smell of Margo soap, damp walls and sweaty lungis. Activism is an extremely dangerous space for the depressed among the poor.

Even Kanhaiya Kumar almost did not make it. Until he was saved by politics—real politics. That is what is common between him and his arch-enemy, Narendra Modi. Both of them were poor men who would have amounted to nothing if it were not for politics. India is rigged in such a way that apart from sports, the only sphere where the talented poor can do well is mass politics.

But then, even as a politician—currently as a Lok Sabha candidate of the Communist Party of India for the Begusarai constituency in Bihar—Kanhaiya Kumar seems to have been co-opted by the same old elites.

For a sanctimonious man who frequently expresses disdain for capitalism, he is now part a political organisation that looks like a farcical derivative of some thought experiments of two wealthy German migrants that the world took too seriously.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’.





Why the ‘well-educated’ suicide bomber is not a surprise


2019-04-26

In the description of the suicide bombers who killed over 250 people in Sri Lanka on Easter Sunday, we could not escape one refrain. That the bombers were “well-educated”, and not poor. As though it was a big surprise. And people were surprised. They are surprised every time they learn a terrorist is a “post-graduate” or from a wealthy family. In the surprise lies the truth that people are adept at concealing innocuous forms of prejudice, but they often unconsciously reveal their more lethal biases. The poor are the true global race, and there is a mainstream respectable racist view that they are more likely to be evil or foolish enough to be lured by Islamist terrorism.

Sometimes truth is indecent, but the perceived link between poverty and terrorism could have been shown to be wrong even before the Easter bombings. Terror masterminds are chiefly from the social elite. Osama bin Laden, for instance, was from the Saudi aristocracy.

But then, the handlers usually never blew themselves up; they co-opt their devout co-religionists for that. And there is a dominant perception that martyrs have to be poor and semi-literate because only they will be brainless enough to submit to “religious indoctrination”. This idea is popular because it is a compliment that the global middle class gives itself by over-rating its two important attributes as proof of intelligence—wealth and college degrees.

The high social class of the Easter suicide bombers points to something that the world is reluctant to accept: that suicide bombing is primarily a mental health issue.

In his book, ‘Mental Health in the War on Terror’, psychiatrist Neil Krishan Aggarwal analyses many academic papers that link suicide bombing to insanity. He mentions a condition known as “folie à plusieurs”, a form of shared psychosis in which many people share a powerful delusion. It is a variety of “folie à deux”, or “the madness of two”, which is a shared delusion of two people. In folie à deux, there is usually a primary partner, who first sees the delusion and transfers it to the secondary one, who is vulnerable enough to receive the delusion. The two then corroborate it for each other.

A few years ago, two sisters in Noida were found nearly starved to death in their homes. They had locked themselves away after hearing the voices of their late parents that warned them that milk and food are poisoned. It is possible that one of the sisters first heard the voices and she passed on the delusion to her sister. The same principle is at work in folie à plusieurs, but with many partners. Innocuous forms of it are very common. Recently, hundreds of girls in north India, or perhaps thousands, were in the grip of a mass delusion that a mysterious force was chopping their braids. Islamist suicide bombing is a lethal form of such a shared psychosis.

Various psychiatrists link various mental disorders to suicide bombers. Ideally, it should be easy for the world to accept that a man blowing himself up and others is under the influence of madness. But that is not how the world works. Islamist suicide bombing as a mental health issue makes the bomber a victim himself, spares his religion, and presents the ludicrous suggestion that his kind need complex medical care. Also, it is easier for the justice system in most countries to grudgingly accept a criminal as insane, but not a whole class of criminal behaviour.

Suicide is too complex to be attributed to one factor. But the crucial question is whether social and political factors are subordinate to one decisive factor: the mental make-up, the neurological wiring of a person. Isn’t it true, after all, that millions who face the same set of conditions that is believed to create a suicide bomber never blow up themselves or kill a soul. Also, the Islamist “indoctrination” theory fails to explain why there have been suicidal killers from other faiths and happy affluent European nations. In March 2015, when a pilot left the cockpit mid-flight to go to the toilet, his co-pilot, Andreas Lubitz, locked the cockpit door and crashed the plane into a mountain. It was easy for the world to diagnose him as a man with a serious psychiatric disorder—because he was not a Muslim.

People who commit suicide are, very simply, suicidal. But that is not enough for society. There is a tendency to attribute a “reason” to it. The suicidal themselves attribute reasons to their final act, leaving notes with the baffling certainty that they will be found.

This framework of ‘cause-and-effect’ demands befitting reasons for every suicide. And the media steps in to supply these reasons. Debt, poverty, oppression. And, of course, “radicalization”.

Shared delusions that push the suicidal to self-destruct, though, are not uniformly expressed across cultures. A depressed Tibetan monk, for instance, is more likely to protest against his oppressor (China) by immolating himself without harming anyone else, imitating several monks before him. Tibetan monks are not a security threat the way Islamist bombers are. So the fact that suicide bombing is a mental health issue does not mean it is not a security issue.

Ultimately, the fact is that the only war that has ever raged in the world is not between good and evil, which is a lame concept of storytellers, but between sanity, which is not very contagious, and insanity, which is.





A new definition of women is strange but popular


2019-05-03

On Wednesday, a respectable body of people that included scientists, defined women. As humans who are deficient in a very useful hormone. And it appears that a majority of women in the world see wisdom in this.

The Court of Arbitration for Sport, the highest court for settling disputes in international sports, was looking into a protest by South African middle-distance runner Caster Semenya, who has an abnormally high level of testosterone for a woman. The International Association of Athletics Federations had deemed this a disqualification from women’s events. The normal female range of testosterone, as indicated by the court, is 0.06 to 1.68 nanomolecules per litre (nm/L) of blood, and the male range is 7.7 to 29.4. The hormone contributes significantly to the strengthening of muscles and the density of bones. Its abundance in men is a crucial factor that makes male athletes perform better than female athletes. This, and the under-appreciated fact that the testicles of a man miraculously hang at different lengths so that they don’t collide when he runs.

Semenya’s defence was that the high level of hormone in her body is a blessing, her genius. But it has been for long an overt and discreet view in the athletic world that a runner with such high levels of testosterone is, very simply, “a man”.

Both, those who support the court and those who are enraged by the verdict, have excellent reasons. What the issue brings up is that “balance” and “objectivity” are not virtues, but qualities that are attainable only for people who have no real stake in the matter.

For a majority of women in the world who are “normal”, and for a minority who are hyperandrogenous (women whose bodies produce an excessive amount of male sex hormones) there is much at stake. The fight is not over which side is moral, but over which hierarchy of moral values is more humane.

Why couldn’t the court define a woman as a human whose 23rd chromosomal pair is “XX”? After all, didn’t we learn in school that men and women are defined by their pair of sex chromosomes?

Female is “XX” and male is “XY”. But that is not the contemporary scientific opinion. “XY” does not conclusively mean “male”. There are women with many female biological traits who have “XY”. This is how the matter looks today: All men are “XY”, but not all “XY” are men. And, all “XX” are women, but not all women are “XX”.

For female athletes with “XX” sex chromosomes, the International Association of Athletics Federations places no limit on the testosterone levels in their bodies. If an “XX” woman has as much of it as Usain Bolt, the world’s athletics federations are willing to consider her gifted, rather than a man. But such a person is unheard of. Almost all female athletes with high testosterone are “XY”. Semenya, too. And for now, she and others like her will have to reduce their testosterone levels to under 5 nm/L to compete among women. It will slow them down.

Lamenting the decision, nbcnews.com ran a headline: Caster Semenya Is Being Forced To Alter Her Body To Make Slower Runners Feel Secure In Their Womanhood.

When people have little to lose, as in a dinner conversation about transgenders, they are willing to accept esoteric notions such as “gender is a spectrum”. They are willing to attack feminists like Germaine Greer, who said that being a woman is an innate condition and a man cannot simply perform a surgery on himself and become a woman just because he imagines he is one. But sports have succeeded where Greer’s feminism has failed.

From my conversations, and from what is emanating in the media, it appears that many women support the feminization of testosterone levels in athletes, and for practical reasons. The very idea of a separate category for women is lost if the hyperandrogenous are going to take over the field.

For young girls to be drawn to sports that require them to invest and sacrifice much, they need role models. And girls are more influenced by women than by men. This is the central logic in professional chess, which has separate tournaments for women. Some pious men find it insulting to women that there must be separate categories based on gender in a sport that requires no brawn, but anyone who has a daughter will know it is wise. If you have tried to teach your daughter football, cricket or chess, you will quickly realize that the primary odds they face is the scarcity of role-models.

In a world that is striving to be fair and just, more and more hyperandrogenous athletes are able to pursue sports. In the future, if they are left to their innate gifts, they might become the face of women’s sports. The fact is, sports constitute a highly visible and glorious representation of women, and they don’t wish to be represented by men, or maleness. Or by a certain sexual ambiguity.

But this is not a uniform view. Semenya, for instance, is deeply admired in her country as a woman. So is Dutee Chand, the Indian athlete who had a similar problem and, in fact, started the whole dispute.

Some people have suggested that there be a third category in sporting events: For those who cannot be assuredly considered women. But this will not only diminish the top hyperandrogenous athletes, whose art might be relegated to a fringe, freak show, it would also destroy the prestige of women’s events, which could end up downgraded to a third tier.





Polarization is not the evil thing it’s made out to be


2019-05-12

When people say “society is polarized today”, what they mean is that other people have extreme views. If you have heard of the word “polarization”, you probably believe that it is something inherently bad because that is the message in every sentence that mentions the word. In reality, the fact that a society is polarized is a sign that one class of people does not have a monopoly anymore over mainstream ideas. The defamation of polarization is the parting abuse of those who have lost control over the transmission of ideas.

The global evangelists of equality and human rights should ideally rejoice polarization, but they are the very people who lament it. It is rare to hear a “chowkidar” utter “polarization”. True that the posh Arun Jaitley uses the word on occasion, but when he does, he appears thrilled that the world is polarized. It is an important reaction. Most people Jaitley represents do not see their world as “polarized”. They see themselves as people who were until recently made to feel like the freak fringe, like delinquents for having a set of reasonable thoughts about the sacred nature of the nation, home, traditions, temples and religion. Many of them in the upper classes used to hide their political thoughts from their family, especially their conscientious daughters. But now, they see their thoughts in the mainstream media shared by billionaires, by actors.

Hugely popular “polarizing figures” may deepen malice in a society by corroborating the reasons why one community despises another, but even such figures do good: they are lightning rods who absorb a lot of hatred.

In a recent interview with actor Akshay Kumar, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said he is probably responsible for the domestic harmony in the actor’s household. Because, he said, Akshay Kumar’s wife Twinkle Khanna expends all her quota of hate on Modi. He was being jovial, but it is still an underrated political analysis. Modi has absorbed so much hate from those who imagine him as a mascot of their darkest fears that when they now talk of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) minus Modi, it is as though the party is some noble United Nations. Modi has done the same favour to the BJP that Muslims have done to Hinduism. Muslims have absorbed so much hatred that they have saved Hinduism from collapsing into caste wars.

One may argue that the lament against “polarization” is not that people have diverse views today but that society is divided by strong views. This is intellectual deceit. “Strong” is a meaningless adjective of opinion. An opinion is by nature strong. In fact, until recently, when the provincial liberated themselves from the uniform thoughts of global scholars, “objectivity” itself was nothing but the opinion of intellectuals, which was passed off as a balanced view, or even a fact. As this column once argued, objectivity is mostly a trick and a farce. In some who are “objective” across the whole width of their life, objectivity is a sign of personality disorder. In many who are “objective” about some issues, it is a sign that they have no stake in those issues. Now that intellectuals cannot promote their biases as “objectivity”, they are framing an overt moral reprimand of objectivity itself.

The journalist Elisabeth Zerofsky recently wrote in The New Yorker: “For many journalists reporting on the new right in the US and Europe, it may be difficult to shake the feeling that this (unbiased reporting of events and people) is somehow irresponsible. There is a strong argument to be made that anyone who professes bigotry and hatred doesn’t deserve to be considered seriously, let alone objectively.” She was reviewing a French book, Berlin, 1933 by Daniel Schneidermann, which argues that the newspapers that were objective about the Nazis were, in retrospect, disgraceful, while the hysterical activist-journalism (which is an oxymoron) alone captured the soul of the times. Schneidermann writes in his book, as translated by Zerofsky: “Activist journalism, journalism that subordinates the quest for truth to the quest for a truth that is useful to its cause, is the only journalism that, today, doesn’t have to feel ashamed about what it produced [about the Nazis]… Everything reasonable, scrupulous, balanced, in my opinion, contributed to lulling the crowd to sleep.” This is the ultimate moral defence of all biased journalism. This is the argument that philanthropy-funded “activist journalism” uses to malign everything it despises: Like lawfully elected strong politicians, the power of the social media and Aadhaar, which have eliminated the need for middlemen.

In response, the other side too fabricates moral reasons to transmit its biases. That is all there is to polarization: the chowkidars of the world imitating the corrupt ways of the asparagus-eaters. Once you find a moral compass for your prejudice, you are automatically an activist.

Are there spheres of human interest without polarization? Even science is sharply divided—by “facts”. Genetics and climate change, for instance. There is dissent in theoretical physics, but not deep enough to say the field that probably gave us the word “polarization” is polarized. Last month, when scientists passed off their conjecture as a “photograph” of a black hole, there was hardly any dissent. My scientist friends tell me that the silence is out of reverence for the rigorous process of science. But politics should teach us that when there is no polarization in a system, it does not mean truth has won; it means one class of people has.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed and Dangerous’





The right way to hate people and be healthy


2019-05-17

The delicate people are saying about our times, “There is so much hate.” They probably mean it in a bad way. After 23 May, when the election results will be announced, Indians will hate each other even more. We have been told that people hating other people is intrinsically bad. But then, there is a way of despising the world that is healthy.

Most people hate the wrong way. In fact, the first lesson that the right way of hating the world teaches us is that most things that most people do is plain wrong. The smart will never find truth or joy in what is popular and prevalent. The human majority is a giant sign to the few: “Be our opposite”.

This is merely one of the many useful ways of despising or at least disliking humans. The English word “misanthropy”, which simply means hatred for human beings, is too lame to capture the essence of the idea. In its literal form, it sounds like a mental disorder, yet there is no known mental illness that matches the state. Even men who commit genocide are dangerous only because they love the idea of another set of people to whom they feel they belong.

Misanthropy always was and is a trait in the sane and the intelligent who love life so much that they wish to pursue the highest form of living. It is never hatred for everyone or for individuals. We must like the people who like us, and be indifferent to those who despise us, and always seize the opportunity to pull the toes of a passing infant. I have noticed in so-called humanitarians that they claim to love humanity, but are so harmful to those who love them. A few days ago, Paul Graham, the billionaire co-founder of the start-up accelerator, Y-Combinator, tweeted, “The most surprising thing I’ve learned from being involved with nonprofits is that they are a magnet for sociopaths.”

A misanthrope is usually never a charlatan. He is a lover to lovers, but is clear that he despises the giant noble herds of man. Slipping through the gaps of the herds without ever being a part of them has to a beautiful life.

Some aspects of misanthropy are actually more mainstream than people realize. As a result they have attracted herds who do not realize that they are being misanthropic. For instance, what can be more misanthropic than the idea of population control? Governments and pious intellectuals champion it: the idea that some humans should not occur so that other humans can live better? It is darker than that.

In some respects, Thanos, the loving dad, conservationist and Marvel supervillain, who terminated half the life in the universe, which was surprisingly an even number, was fairer than the promoters of India’s population policy. Thanos did not pick who will not live. It was a lottery.

In contrast, the respectable world’s population control is not about controlling the population of humans as it claims; it is about controlling the population of poor humans. The Japanese and Scandinavians and many others in the rich world beg their own to procreate a lot. Even India’s affluent Parsi community has taken out ads to implore their own to produce children. About four years ago, one ad said, “Be responsible. Don’t use a condom tonight.” In effect, it is to the poor that the world says, “Let there not be many of you.”

There are other mainstream misanthropic ideas. The civilised world itself is based on the premise that humans are untrustworthy and their society will collapse without authoritarian order. Across history, most ideas that overestimated human character have failed. All utopias have failed. The success of capitalism is based on its low opinion of human character.

Only a misanthrope is trained to see that social movements do not have moral foundations. They rise from a prophet’s insanity, or a lost soul’s search for meaning, or a feudal lord’s loss of prestige, which are misunderstood by the public as altruism. Let us take a recent moral lament and try to understand how mistrust for people who claim to have good intentions can help a misanthrope see clearly. For the past several months, a type of people in India have been lamenting “the destruction of institutions”. A misanthrope would have framed the issue in this manner: Nehruvians from the social upper classes are expressing their anxiety that the great egalitarian outfits that they run (canned laughter) are now being ruined by semi-literate elected rustics. When we frame it this way, we can see social lament as something petty, a mere turf war.

In the end, was the Supreme Court diminished by provincial politicians or by the way sophisticates handled a sexual harassment case against the chief justice of India? And, in the end, was the Election Commission diminished by elected rustics or the intellectuals who destroyed the reputation of the Commission in the media just because it passed some orders that were not favourable to them?

It is the same mistrust for all that is popular and sacred that can push a misanthrope into healthy personal habits. The most dangerous food that people eat, they eat in the name of belonging and home. Culture is, in reality, a sugar-delivery device. By staying away from the social rituals of the majority, a misanthrope can stay away from junk food, spiritual fads, small talk and sleeping late.

If I may quote a character from one of my novels: “It is the misanthrope alone who has clarity. By standing outside the huddles of man, he sees a lot, and what he often sees is the evidence that people are not as smart as dogs think they are.”

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Six messages in Narendra Modi’s return to power


2019-05-26

The new alpha male of our times is a man who talks tough, but is also unashamed of tearing up, and of touching the feet of older men. But there are far deeper messages in the swag of Narendra Modi: One, if there were objective measures like elections in every sphere of Indian life, many Rahul Gandhis would be in trouble. Overnight, most of the “elite” in arts, activism, journalism and academics would be replaced by people who are more substantial, or admirable, or relevant.

Two, the Prime Minister of India can today face the whole nation and make fun of “secularism”, as Modi did on Wednesday in his victory speech. Secularism was always an atheist’s point of view on how believers should behave. It never made sense to believers. In many Western democracies, secularism is denying god the right to interfere with law; in India; it means in practice, all gods have equal right to meddle with life. In Indian journalism, secularism was mostly a vacuous phrase and the subject of one of those foolish photo collages where the juxtaposition of a temple, mosque and a church, all of them probably encroaching public land, is portrayed as a demonstration of peaceful co-existence. After Modi’s dig at secularism, some journalists pointed out that the word was part of the Indian constitution (added late, though, in 1976), as if this somehow made it some sacred quality of Indian character. But then, Modi knew very early in his life that if a nation had to proclaim it was secular, it probably was not.

Three, in his speech, he said that he will create an India where a Pragya Thakur cannot win an election. Of course, he did not put it this way, but that is the meaning of an expression he used: “Inclusive India”. This is unlikely. There will not be such an India for years to come. Modi was just reaching out, and being nice, which has its own value.

The lesson for Muslims in this election has been that their guardians have been duds. All those activists and poets and the “200 writers, 200 artists” who signed petitions were only good at signing petitions and nothing more.

In new India, Muslims will certainly find opportunities to excel; Muslims may continue to be film superstars, another Muslim might captain the Indian cricketteam, but a measure of freedom in a country is also the right to make a mistake and get away with it, or face only proportionate punishment. Imagine a Muslim in a white cap getting into a road scuffle with a Hindu. I don’t think this can happen anymore. For some time now, I have sensed a restraint in public expressions by Muslims, who in another time would have felt free enough to express anger.

Maybe the people who feared Modi and donated their hard-earned money to activist websites that claimed to be practising journalism may have been cleverer had they bought those shady electoral bonds instead.

Four, for several months, we have been told that demonetization destroyed the lives of the poor, and that the unemployment rate in India was now the highest in 45 years. And that these factors had diminished Modi politically. Yet he won.

Intellectuals now claim that nationalism and love for Modi are chiefly responsible for his victory. But it is hard to believe that Modi’s voters, who made up nearly 40% of the Indian electorate, would have rewarded him if the impact of his reign were as bad as academics claimed. Something about the average Indian voter’s relative prosperity, optimism, employment patterns, the psychology of their labour participation and about Aadhaar’s efficient distribution of welfare benefits was not captured by journalists and academics, who saw what they wanted to see.

Days after Modi announced the cancellation of big notes, I had argued in Hindustan Times that this was politically a sound move. I had then based my argument on how the average Indian, despite their own pains, would perceive the panic of their feudal masters. Modi, in fact, has led his party to over a dozen major electoral victories since demonetization. I don’t believe, though, that the memory of middle-class panic was relevant to this year’s general elections. Even so, if everything that most columnists and academics said about the impact of demonetization on the poor was accurate, Modi should have been routed. I am not saying it was a great idea. I am saying you don’t take away the money of the poor and win elections. So, Modi’s dramatic victory should tell us that it was not the disaster that intellectuals made it out to be.

Five, Kanhaiya Kumar would have realized by now that there is a mystical relationship between the poor and the refined Nehruvians. The poor do exactly the opposite of what the intellectuals have deemed the poor should do for their own good. Now that Kumar knows student politics and the admiration of the urbane does not prepare him for real life, he should consider liberating himself from the employment of his middle-class masters who have a habit of hiring revolutionaries. And, he must accept one thing they did not teach him in Jawaharlal Nehru University: that, when a guy mouths the same economic ideas that kept his mother poor, then he has been co-opted by the same kind of people who kept his mother poor.

Six, the sweet analysis of salad-eaters: “Priyanka should now enter politics” turned out to be not such a great insight, after all. What are the other important things they are wrong about?

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Indians scorn ‘dynasties’ but are raising pampered children


2019-06-02

From what I gather, Rahul Gandhi is a good man, the kind of man who will win at the end of the main story arc in pulp fiction. There is something banal about his good nature, which is exactly how goodness resides in most of us. As a decent man, he is aware of his luck. Seven years ago, he said: “My father was in politics. My grandmother and great-grandfather were in politics. So, it was easy for me to enter politics. This is a problem. I am a symptom of this problem.” There is a general view, even among those who like him, that he is so privileged, so protected that he does not know much about life and the feral real world. He is a modern Prince Siddhartha, who is a peepal tree short. He is what our children will become.

We are all raising Rahul Gandhis. Even the Chowkidars who have scorn for Gandhi raise their own children to be him. On this aspect of parenting, there is no polarization. Everyone admires Narendra Modi; everyone is raising Rahul Gandhis at home.

Even those who were once underdogs, the proud self-made, are not training their children to start at the bottom and find their way to the top. Our children have never taken public buses, or eaten real street food. They may not even have Indian bugs in their gut. They speak the language of their parents very poorly, that is, if they speak it at all. They have never talked to the poor, only instructed them. They have always travelled in a car, watching a menacing nation pass by, dreading at traffic lights the urchins and beggars who arrive to plead. Ten-year-olds in my charmed colony have never gone to a shop alone to buy things for their home. And even if some of them do go down those 500m to the market, they are equipped with phones and WhatsApp location-tracking, and they are filled by their parents with the terrors of life and all that can go wrong. Even large adolescent boys, their inner thighs colliding, walk with tiny maids half their size who carry their bulky cricket kits. As they grow older, they will be even more protected, in less obvious but more substantial ways. Our children are island people whose nation is the sea. And their parents make fun of Rahul Gandhi.

It is true that Gandhi’s social privileges did not prepare him to face the feral men of Indian politics who were naturally selected, who had to be extremely capable to come so far. But then, the fact is that a Modi is rare even in politics. Across all spheres of Indian life, the rags-to-riches story is uncommon today. That is why raising Rahul Gandhis is an inevitable parenting strategy.

The privileged usually win. Technology, business, arts, mainstream cinema and other occupations where talent is subordinate to lineage are dominated by Rahul Gandhis. The Indian elite have 100% reservation for their own genetic material, the reason why it is comical when they insult quotas for Dalits in colleges and jobs.

The objective of a family is to give its children unfair advantages. In that sense, every good family is a cartel.

There was a time, not long ago, when it appeared that this was true only in India. As a child, what struck me about Hollywood films was an America where parents did not have any meaningful control over adolescents, and where college education did not appear mandatory. In those stories, parents usually told their children they would not be paying for their college, while in my Chennai, the engineering or medical college was an inevitability, and fathers were whipping their sons who lost 1% in maths. In retrospect, this arrangement made sense. In nations where the state was unreliable, families had to be strong. They were crucial. Hence, parents could exercise great control and the servitude of dependant adult children was passed off as tradition. And in countries where the youth could depend on the state, the young seemed to be adventurous and independent. But now, modern American families have begun to resemble Indian.

About four years ago, the then US president Barack Obama said: “America thrived in the 20th century because we made high school free, sent a generation of GIs to college, and trained the best workforce in the world. But in a 21st-century economy that rewards knowledge like never before… two in three job openings will require some higher education. Two in three. And yet, we still live in a country where too many bright, striving Americans are priced out of the education they need.”

In response to this age of aristocracy, the American middle classes are supporting their children well into their 20s, funding their education and lifestyles, and protecting them from the tumults of life. Across the world, parents are raising Rahul Gandhis.

Our children will join a global monoculture of decent, ecologically-conscious privileged youth, who will type angry or sly essays about the evils of inequality. They will unknowingly protect their turfs by creating social and intellectual tribes whose doors will be shut to most of the youth.

We do realize the unfairness of passing on privileges to our children, but what can parents do? Are they supposed to impoverish their children?

It is amusing that the person who has reminded us of the most reasonable solution is Rahul Gandhi. About six years ago, Gandhi said he was choosing bachelorhood. “If I get married and have children, I will be status-quoist and will like my children to take my place.” Assuming he was not just trying to get out of a relationship, this was an act of kindness that many of us did not do.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Why we need not be paranoid about nationalism


2019-06-10

Many years before Indians developed an affection for their soldiers, and a very expensive cricketer endorsed military insignia free of cost, there was an earthquake in Gujarat. The 2001 Bhuj quake killed many thousands. In a town called Anjar, I saw a man sitting on top of a cupboard that was resting on the body of his own brother. He was breaking the cupboard with a knife. He said there were jewels, money and perfume bottles inside. He wanted to extract them before the soldiers, who were conducting rescue missions, arrived. The word in the area was that the soldiers were stealing valuables. A jawan would later tell me: “I am sick of some of these people. Once they realize their family is dead, they quickly think of what to do next. Just now a woman asked me to bring an almirah out. She said there is ₹3,50,000 in there. She also said that she will be watching me.”

It was another age when Indians revered dead soldiers, but were not so respectful of the living, whom they treated as their hires. Today, Indians take the armed forces very seriously. They may not trust them with their own jewels, but if they heard someone else being so suspicious of the gallant men, they would be honestly outraged.

At the on-going ICC Cricket World Cup, M.S. Dhoni proudly wore gloves that had the insignia of the special forces, to which he does not belong. It appears most Indians do not think there is anything wrong with that. He is, after all, an Indian gladiator. But Dhoni does not play cricket for India as is commonly believed. He is an employee of a co-operative society called the Board of Control for Cricket in India, which is affiliated to an offshore trust registered in British Virgin Islands called the International Cricket Council. The World Cup is a contest between private clubs. People are not ignorant of such facts, but wish to see themselves in every great story in front of them and they enter the fable, in an expensive way, by lending a team of athletes the identity of their tribe, their nation to a sports team.

Until recently, sports was among the very few areas where Indians expressed their patriotism. This has changed. Nationalism has gone mainstream in modern India. The recent draft of the National Education Policy, for instance, has conveyed that it plans to make national pride an important part of an Indian child’s upbringing. Most people today spring to a willing attention when the national anthem is played in theatres. When this farce began in Mumbai’s cinema halls over 15 years ago, I would keep sitting and some self-righteous simpleton from behind would poke me and I would ask the facile patriot in which language the anthem was written (many said Sanskrit or Hindi, and even at this very moment, I am sure thousands of Chowkidars are Googling the answer). Today, it is dangerous for me to behave in this manner. All three superstar Khans have flaunted their patriotism by singing the anthem on the screen. About four years ago, when word broke that the film-maker Kiran Rao had told her husband Aamir Khan that she wished to quit India because of what she thought was an atmosphere of hatred, Indians erupted in anger, including expat patriots who had actually quit India for a better life.

Even as recently as the early 1980s, Indians made fun of India. In jokes where men of various nationalities entered a bar, the Indian turned out to the dumbest, if there was no Pakistani among them. We had a very low opinion about our nation. At a convocation ceremony at the Indian Institute of Technology in Chennai, the chief guest said “brain drain is better than brain in the drain” and there was a standing ovation. Most of that same audience will not tolerate such a statement today.

But is nationalism evil, as global intellectuals make it out to be? Like any powerful idea, religion for instance, nationalism can be used by dangerous men, but there are other ways to look at it.

The Indian intellectual’s theoretical contempt for it is foolish plagiarism of an old irrelevant European paranoia of nationalism. He has been trying to convey a distinction between “nationalism” and “patriotism”. Western intellectuals from the time of George Orwell, too, have tried to do this—to defame nationalism as the malice of bad people and celebrate patriotism as the love of good people. A few months ago, French President Emmanuel Macron deployed beautiful language to make the false distinction: “Nationalism is a betrayal of patriotism. By putting our own interests first, with no regard for others, we erase the very thing that a nation holds dearest, and the thing that keeps it alive: Its moral values.”

But the fact is that every time intellectuals have tried to explain an idea by splitting hairs over the etymology of words, you can be sure they are confused themselves. Two different words do not create two branches of a powerful human emotion. As a note reads in the film Birdman: “A thing is a thing, not what is said of that thing.”

For most people who feel it, nationalism and patriotism are the same thing. And, it is more than a ploy to recruit poor men to die for the nation.

The most underrated quality of national pride is that it is a precursor to national shame. A newly and immensely proud society will soon demonstrate collective shame. For its flaws, its bad air quality, its poor roads, its filth, its corruption and its castes. Nationalism may not make Indians pay their taxes honestly, but it will inspire them to do many other useful things.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’.





How to avoid being fooled by the lure of prestige


2019-06-16

We are living in an age where everyone receives compliments. Everyone is being “so humbled” by tributes. Golda Meir, the former prime minister of Israel, would have told them, “Don’t be so humble, you are not that great.” The fact is that these days, the greatest tribute you can receive is the hatred of fools. Compliments have become so common they have lost their value. You may argue that what matters is who is issuing the compliments. We now arrive at a caste system the world is allowed to respect—prestige.

A prestigious event is different from a moment of mere tribute. Prestige is always issued by an institution; it is never issued by the low to the high; as a result it is influential and useful; like compliments, in a context, prestige too dies, but it dies in a different way; prestige becomes worthless when the process of achieving it is so democratized that the wrong kind of people have a fair shot at it; its death is never known for many years and thousands endure great suffering to achieve it long after the prestige is not prestigious anymore.

Except in some spheres, like sports, the rationing of prestige is an autocratic process. The commercial success of a film, or a book that sells millions of copies is not prestigious. Outside sports, anything that can be objectively measured is too democratic to be prestigious. But some kinds of prestige are not fabrications issued by institutions; they naturally stir human emotions. Like the achievement of sending a human to space, or scaling Mount Everest. But prestige that is not manufactured by an institution and is, instead, fuelled by raw human reverence is prestigious only for a brief period of time.

A few days ago, there was an astonishing photograph of more than 300 climbers on Everest lining up to stand on the summit. The overcrowding resulted in deaths. Since the peak was first scaled in 1953, over 4,000 people have done it. A few years ago, a newspaper reported, there was a brawl involving 100 climbers near the summit, during which some sherpas threatened three Europeans with death. There is no prestige in climbing Everest anymore. Too many people, including improbable people, have done it. Also, with modern technology and modern ways of training, it has become much easier. We must be careful to note that many who climb the mountain do so for the thrill of the sport. But I am certain that for a majority of climbers, it is about winning the right to say that they did it. They risk death for a prestige that does not really exist anymore. Scores of climbers die every year, and the disabled undergo great suffering to pursue a false honour.

The farce of scaling Everest for prestige is the story at the heart of many futile pursuits. Those doctorates, for instance, that imprison impoverished youth for over a decade, making them produce sham theses, when they could have achieved more in the slightly riskier world outside the refugee camps of campuses. I must make clear that if one truly wants to explore whether Robert Frost’s iconic poem about two diverging roads in the woods was really about choice and destiny (it was not), or explore the inside jokes in Gabriel Garcia Marquez’s One Hundred Years Of Solitude (there were many), then the youth is blessed. What can be more satisfying than the pursuit of knowledge, any knowledge. Also, there are practical utilities, like employment opportunities in academics. But if a person is pursing a doctorate in these areas for prestige, the society has a duty to tell him, but won’t, that there is none, especially for those who do not have the social equity of that class which asks cute questions like, “Can the subaltern speak?” On the many overrated summits of this world, there are queues of the naive.

Many of us went to institutions that were considered prestigious to varying degrees, but they have today lost their status purely because a wide spectrum of people have access to them. Even the civil services and the Indian Institutes of Technology have lost their shine. Even though it is more difficult than ever to crack their entrance exams, they have become accessible to an increasing number of poor small-town and rural Indians. In this light, the most foolish step of the government is to replicate “prestigious” institutes. Buildings can be replicated, not prestige. Prestige in India migrates the moment there are equal opportunities to achieve it.

This is exactly how the world treated India, which used to crave prestige and imagined that it lay in a set of achievements. Our space mission, for instance.

Even though the founders of the mission projected it as a development exercise, it is hard not to see the lure of prestige in it. Rocket science then was sexy. At various points in the nation’s life, Indians have felt immense pride in their rocket science. India demonstrated that it could send metal to space, around the moon and to Mars. And some people did get overexcited about space scientists in saris as though it was some great contrast. And India demonstrated that it can do many things, which the Americans did, at a fraction of the cost. The real costs of India’s space programme are opaque, but still its moon mission famously cost less than the film Gravity. India’s Mars mission cost less than Interstellar and its space station, too, which it announced this week, will be cheaper than most Hollywood films that feature a space station . But has India won the admiration of the world or, did it instead diminish the prestige of rocket science itself?





A tribute to ‘The Office’ before the Indian version is out


2019-06-23

Since it first appeared in 2001, British television series The Office has delighted millions across the world, including idiot bosses who think it is about other people.

There are nine versions of the series in seven languages, including its most famous adaptation, the American version. In a few days the Indian adaptation of The Office, in Hindi, will release on Hotstar, and I have finally found the opportunity to pay my respects to a rare British work that is at once celebrated and actually good.

In the original version, a small-town regional manager of a paper company, David Brent, played by Ricky Gervais, who is also the co-creator of the series, takes us through his life. He is a very familiar man. He is the middle-aged manager, who has no capacity to be with his own thoughts; who likes to talk and pronounce some words in festive ways to appear entertaining; who likes to think of himself as mad; who hedges the risk of speaking his mind by couching it as a joke; who laughs at his own jokes until laughter itself assumes the form of sorrow; who requires the comfort of a sidekick and who desperately wants to be liked by attractive people. David is an amiable lonely man, and loneliness is never about scarcity of people but a result of wishing for the company of those who do not want to be with you.

The Office achieves the highest level of humour in moments that are hilarious because they are very true, and at once, sad for the same reason. Once, he pranks his secretary by telling her that she is fired, and he is genuinely surprised when she breaks down. When she realizes it was a prank, she conveys to him the very substance of what he really is: “You’re a sad little man.”

There is a streak of evil in this man-child, precisely because he is a man-child. He reminds us of the possibility that the evil in all humans is only a residue of qualities that children needed to survive childhood.

The American version of David Brent is Michael Scott, played by Steve Carell. David Brent is an authentic provincial male manager, hence a despicable character, while Michael Scott is primarily stupid, which makes him more endearing.

Like in any quality work of humour, a part of the brilliance of The Office is its exploitation of the prevailing cowardice of political correctness. In one scene, Michael Scott is flirting with an “Asian” waitress and he discreetly marks her arm with a felt-pen to distinguish her from another “Asian” waitress. In another scene that is intended to be comic, an Indian employee named Kelly is caught sabotaging the internal assessments of two salesmen in her office and, to defend herself, she tells Michael she was raped by them. Michael tells her: “You cannot say ‘I was raped’ and expect all of your problems to go away, Kelly. Not again. Don’t keep doing that.” And, Michael’s sidekick Dwight, who is carrying on a secret affair with the fiancée of a colleague, often smiles at us to make fun of the cuckold, making us all complicit.

Humour, when it works, is always a reward for risk.

The Office takes great risks; as a result it fails, too. For instance, when Dwight reveals that he hires illegal migrants to work on his farm, he says that when it is time to pay them he makes his cousin pose as an immigration and naturalization officer, who takes them away in a van, drops them in a small town and tells them it is Canada. This moment fails because we are on the side of the impoverished labourers and the scene is not brilliant enough to override its cruelty.

The victories and failures of humour say a lot about its audiences. In the scenes that work, we are all complicit. People discreetly accept that they, too, cannot tell two “Chinese” waitresses apart; and that they do believe women play victims to get out of situations; and that they find something comical about unfaithfulness. But the exploitation of migrants by Dwight is not as funny because most people, even when no one is looking, will not make an impoverished migrant do hard manual labour with the intention of not paying him.

For many years after I watched the British original, I refused to watch the American version because I had somehow got the impression that American adaptation was more farcical. But very recently, I decided to take a chance, and I found that it had preserved the complex hilarious sorrow of the original.

In a scene I have mentioned earlier, after Kelly is caught sabotaging two of her colleagues, she reveals that she did it because they had not attended her party and she was hurt. Michael himself is a man who is always reaching out, always trying to get people to attend his parties and is always spurned. He is a man who survives life by not seeing his circumstances. But sometimes he does see clearly. So, in one of the most tender moments in the series, he tells her: “I have an enormous amount of trouble trying to get people to come to my place. And I hate it. I can’t tell you how much leftover guacamole I have ended up eating over the years. I don’t even know why I make it in such great quantities.”

But now and then, Michael does find companionship. He even finds love. “Chemistry”, The Office teaches us, is often a convenient union of two equal handicaps. In some cases, we are rewarded with love when we are misunderstood by gorgeous people. Sometimes we get lucky, and all our guacamole gets eaten.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





How the country’s many flaws and evils create jobs


2019-06-28

Three malnourished men in paramilitary costumes check the car as it enters the hotel. One security guard has an under-vehicle search mirror that looks more expensive than he. The second man gestures the driver to open the boot. The third man looks into the boot, and no one in the world knows what he is looking for. Across the nation, outside every hotel and mall, the man who peers into the boot and into the car will ignore huge suitcases and bags, probably even corpses. His job is just to look and wave you through. These men were once farmers, scholars of the land, and now earn more doing such jobs in the city. Maybe their real job is not to deter a terror attack but to be the first to take the bullets so that richer people inside can be warned by the sound.

At the entrance of any given Indian airport, another man in a legally-sanctioned paramilitary outfit stands for hours and checks flight tickets and identity cards of all passengers, even though he would not be able to spot a fabricated flight ticket or ID. Inside, in the toilets, there may be that little dark defeated man staring at you as you urinate, waiting to hand out a tissue paper which would have been easier to pick from a non-human tissue paper holder. And, across all glitzy public spaces, one see couples trailed by a pale Jharkhand maid, in cheaper clothes, who carries their baby. In millions of Indian homes, there are two maids, some of whom peel pine nuts for hours. India is a vast play with bad costumes.

And, there is the Indian Railways, which still has “pointsmen”, who could be women too, whose job is to stand near a track to hand over a small object called a “token” to the engine driver as the train hurtles past at about 100 kmph. The token is an official communication to the driver that he can pass, a job that an electronic signal performs better. The railways is primarily an employment scheme that also runs trains.

Many powerful men in the past have declared that they will privatise the railways, but eventually never found the courage to do it. Indians make fun of the government for being overstaffed with underemployed people, but the fact is that every Indian home is exactly that—serviced by drivers and “chhotus”, who spend hours idling, playing cards and watching porn beneath trees everyday.

India’s many flaws, taken together, are a giant employment-generation mechanism. The laziness of its rich, the uselessness in housework of pampered men retarded by their mothers, the failed provinces that churn out millions of cheap labourers, the social pettiness of the lucky who require the reassurance of being feudal lords to other humans, the foolishness of nominal security, the inefficiencies, incompetence and disrespect for the time of the poor have created millions of jobs that provide livelihood to hundreds of millions who are otherwise not required.

The most maligned Indian flaw, that of our society deeming some jobs fit only for the low castes, too, provides employment. Not just that, it also gives the poor a monopoly over some professions. For instance, in skinning dead cattle, Dalits do not face competition from more influential communities that could have otherwise stolen their livelihood. Some intellectuals claim that Dalits are “entrapped” by such professions. The Dalits themselves do not see their circumstances this way. The fact is that the castes that intellectuals hail from dictate their professions in a more inescapable way. Isn’t a Brahmin, after all, fated to be in software, surgery, finance and academics? The elite of India is entrapped in a sophisticated version of cow-skinning.

Such these jobs of the highly educated and the rich do not necessarily have more meaning than other jobs. In fact, many things that the poor are forced to do for employment have greater meaning than many “white-collar” jobs.

What do some “big people” do? Serious men go in cars thinking of ways to make people drink sugared water, or buy a type of useless insurance, or a condom that has dots on it, or to merely gamble with other people’s money. Some even write columns about how most jobs have no meaning.

There was a time when scholars thought that the unproductive poor Indian was a serious problem. Even now, there are scholars who think that, but it is because they are not scholarly enough. I sense a diminishing scorn for superfluous lowly jobs because most reputable jobs themselves are under threat from computers.

Tech billionaires are telling us that most highly educated people will become “useless” in the future. That would include most analysts, bankers, doctors, lawyers, journalists and even code writers. Already, in India, it is easier for talented carpenters to find work than it is for a small-town postgraduate in arts who was fooled into higher education.

In the future, these billionaires convey, only a small elite will be required to run the world. But I know that people will ensure that such an efficient world will not come to be. Such an automated world will have no meaning, unless there is war. What will machines produce if not many humans can buy those goods?

India, through all its flaws, has always demonstrated that employment is not only about efficiency, requirement and common sense but also about crowding our times with other humans who deserve the reasonable joys of purpose and feeling useful.





What is this ‘idea of India’ Rahul Gandhi talks about?


2019-07-07

On Wednesday, when Rahul Gandhi formally resigned as president of the Congress by issuing a public letter in English, he revealed that he does not have a talent for malice, which is a very useful gift in his profession. He said: “I have no hatred or anger towards the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), but every living cell in my body instinctively resists their idea of India.”

This is completely different from what Narendra Modi told his biographer, Nilanjan Mukhopadhyay, about his feelings for the Congress party as a child: “…the strong hatred towards the Congress which was prevalent at that time became part of me. I think it impacted even the mind of the child… People had a tremendous dislike for the Congress… I asked the elders why they were burning the effigies and they said that the Congress had done something wrong—had done harm to us.”

When people hate, this is exactly how they hate. They do not behave like Gandhi. We don’t separate humans from the organization that they constitute, and only “instinctively resist their idea” as though we are not indulging in hate but in waste disposal in Singapore. A person who thinks of hate in this manner has confused the parlour tricks of sophisticated articulation with a powerful human emotion. What “every living cell” in Rahul’s body stands for is even more abstract but very familiar to all of us. In his letter, he has mentioned concepts like the “fabric of India” and “idea of India”. He has, naturally, implied that there is the Congress “idea of India” that is superior to the BJP’s “idea of India”.

What exactly is this “idea of India”? What is, first of all, the Congress idea of India that he has invoked many times, maybe inspired by the alluring title of Sunil Khilnani’s influential book, published in 1997, on the political and economic ideas that newly independent India had adopted. But outside academics, in the nation and times we have lived, is there such a thing as the “idea of India”? Is this idea a reflection of how Indians in general are, or is it an instruction to all of us on how we ought to be?

From various speeches of Gandhi, it appears that his idea of India is a bit of both. He has a theory about our character and a theory about our future story arcs. He says we are innately of a nice sweet ancient type.

His idea of India is clearly flattering. We are, he says, “compassionate” and filled with love for others. But then this could be the summary of almost all nations in the world as told by their worst writers. Hundreds of professional politicians, and politicians who are called poet laureates and other things, have described their lands in this manner. When India talks about “heritage”, you would think no one else has heritage. Actually, I should admit, as a boy I was so enchanted by the way India spoke of its rivers that I thought no other country had rivers. This, when I was yet to see a single river in full spate in Tamil Nadu. I also thought no other country had villages.

It was inevitable that Gandhi, in his letter, would celebrate “diversity”: “India has never and will never be one voice. It is and always will be a symphony of voices”. Yet, in his view, there is one correct idea of India.

The fact is that there is no such thing as the idea of India. First of all, we cannot be sure what is Indian about India. Every single scholar who has tried to answer the question, “what unites India” has emerged from the exercise silly. In the past, I have heard them mention cricket, democracy and even English and “Bollywood”, but strangely not Hinduism because that would be risky territory for them. But all along, what really unites India is, very simply, our habit of being Indian. India is the proof that a nation needs to have no great stirring virtues and nothing in common to remain a nation. A nation is a habit. Everything else is intellectual retrofitting. You are born, you are told this is your nation, you learn of the borders, you learn the fables of history and foes, you accept, and you love in simple ways. Here, generations have lived peacefully and violently, with compassion and cruelty. There are no defining Indian virtues. Every flattering myth about ourselves we know to be lies (“We are secular”), or as the misunderstanding of the naivety of the provincial poor (“The guest is God”).

A habit is real, and serious. But then doesn’t habit require a fable to survive? Yes, a habit requires a story, but not to survive, rather to find meaning in an otherwise pointless identity.

The BJP, too, has an idea of India. Rahul does not fully explain what his arch rivals stand for. All he says is such things as, “What they fear, I embrace.” What is the BJP’s idea of India? Before Modi became Prime Minister in 2014, from his speeches it appeared that his idea of India was a place where everyone was equal, but Hindus were more equal; where a new economic order would bring back prosperity and global respect; and where the poor would be trained not to be alms-seekers, but to work towards the greater prosperity of the nation. But now, the BJP’s official idea of India is similar to Gandhi’s. We are ancient, good and peaceful.

In reality, Gandhi’s idea of India and Modi’s are theories about people. And, they represent the two broad kinds of ideas from which everything else flows: one that has immense respect for human nature, and the other that has a lower opinion of the human character. In my view, ideas that do not overestimate human character eventually triumph.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





How mental disorders make influencers influential


2019-07-14

I propose a theory about influence. A long time ago, when things were yet to be named, a schizophrenic sees a vision. He transmits it to the world. He has such faith in his vision that other people begin to see what he sees. They accept his idea, misunderstanding it to varying degrees to suit their own interests. The vision becomes a society’s purpose, and the sane then try to imitate the insane to achieve its promise.

This could be the history of cults, communism, intense love for nature, the notion of enlightenment, and that all life in the universe is interconnected by a force which also resides in the base of the human spine, and that everything is a mere illusion, and that misery is the inescapable fate of life, and even the idea of meditation, which used to mean a proper trance when I was a boy but has now been downgraded by a mysterious white authority as merely “watching your breath”. Have you noticed, the defining aspect of our most powerful ideas is that we will always fall short of comprehending it?

What if many things that we call philosophies today had emerged from a mental disorder? What if influencers are influential chiefly because of their mental anomalies? The sane trying to emulate the insane—what if all our tumults arise from this?

In The Collected Schizophrenias, a young American writer named Esmé Weijun Wang tells the story of her own schizoaffective disorder. She has been hospitalized several times. She has dodged invisible demons, which were not metaphorical, and seen a train hurtle towards her and vanish. She makes one passing observation: “Sometimes I encounter people who don’t believe in mental illness…Often, they claim that such diagnoses are oppressive to those with unique abilities…I am frequently told with great sincerity that in other cultures, a person who would be diagnosed with schizophrenia in the West might be lauded as a shaman and healer. Have you ever considered, they ask, that schizophrenia might be a spiritual characteristic, and not a malady?”

She scoffs at the notion that a torturous disease must be mistaken for talent, but at once she also hopes that her mental condition is a pathway to “spirituality”. What is clear is that if she had not revealed her mental disorders and instead written about, say, the meaning of life, she would have portrayed, in a highly influential way, a hopeless world. Thousands of writers before her with mental disorders achieved just that, and there are thousands today who continue to shape the views of the world because of their mental condition. A sense of doom is far more captivating than the mirth of a healthy mind.

This is one of the major forces behind the prevailing paranoia around politics and the fear of “the return of fascism”. This is the reason why many intellectuals frequently invoke George Orwell, who wrote gloomy stories about the future of civilization. Intellectuals try to see sense in his prose, but the fact is he was completely wrong about politics and the present world, which is a vastly better place than his mind conjured. Orwell, not surprisingly, had serious health problems.

About 15 years ago, a study by Caritas St. Elizabeth’s Medical Center in Boston suggested that the affliction of tuberculosis and other misfortunes affected his mental state. Orwell himself had told his friends that he would’ve been more cheerful had he not been so ill. Yet, he managed to influence future intellectuals precisely because of his paranoia. In the arts, a happy truth does not travel as far as a gloomy lie.

The contemporary world of humanitarian lament, too, contains players who have been diagnosed with a range of mental disorders that makes them highly persuasive narrators. There is a popular belief that their suffering makes them feel more deeply about the problems of others. This is a myth. Empathy is merely a form of self-absorption and self-obsession. The ill create a gloomy world because that is what they see and that is what comforts them.

Recently, when Somi Das, a student of clinical psychology, was interning at a psychiatric care centre, she observed in a Facebook post that many patients with serious mental ailments were “hyper-clued into political news”. They spoke with more clarity about politics and elections than about their own lives. This phenomenon points to the possibility that the modern obsession with news may be an expression of a malady even in people who do not exhibit any symptoms of mental disorder. People are not consuming news, they are consuming anxiety.

You may know of people who appear to be normal and even wise, but are always lamenting excessively about things, about how the world is warming, how there is so much plastic in our rivers, how the government will spy on us through our Aadhaar numbers. These are not unworthy issues and these people are not mentally ill, but they have a tendency to be agitated by the alarm in the air, whose hidden origins are from the darkest depths of the mind.

In the transmission of gloom and paranoia there are many concentric circles of influence. The originators themselves may not be highly influential, but they influence the influencers who have political or economic reasons to buy into ideas, or are themselves on the edges of the spectrum of mental ailments. To be impervious to the most powerful influences of our times, to be outside all the circles of influence, is the very meaning of being sane today. Very few people can achieve that. Sanity, it turns out, is a minority condition.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous





Is it possible to hack the brain to make us immortal?


2019-07-19

To live very long and well, Indian billionaires invest in God, while American tech billionaires invest in becoming gods. For some time both the ideas seemed vacuous, but now, it appears that the tech billionaires may be more persuasive after all.

A few days ago, Elon Musk, the most famous billionaire in the world, whose chief interest is creating the future, announced that one of his companies, Neuralink, is working towards merging the human brain and the computer. It will achieve this by planting thousands of tiny electrodes into the brain that will then convert thought into signals, which can instruct a computer to do tasks. Eventually, man will know everything a computer does, and he will “achieve a sort of symbiosis with artificial intelligence”.

Musk is among the many who are investing in a “brain machine interface” whose preliminary assignment is to solve the effects of brain diseases. Thus, Neuralink will first perform the minor tasks of God, which is to be useful and moral—make the blind see and the paralyzed feel. But its ultimate objective is to perform the major task of God, which is being God. After all, downloading the memory of a computer onto a human brain is omniscience, and uploading a human brain to a computer is immortality. A god, generally, has to be immortal and omniscient. Not coincidentally, these two vital properties have also been areas of manic concern for the Western elite, who have been hopeful of prolonging life and paranoid about what is vaguely called “artificial intelligence”. The brain machine interface is a response to that. We will live long as computers. And, the sentient machine, it turns out, will be us.

Over the past few years, tech billionaires have invested considerable money in finding ways to prolong life. Prolonging healthy life might be immortality itself for the simple reason that the science of anti-ageing may grow so fast that it can keep delaying death in perpetuity. Venkatraman Ramakrishnan, who won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 2009, told me a few months ago: “Californian billionaires are having such a good time at the party of life that they don’t want it to stop. They don’t want to go out into the cold night at their appointed time.”

However, the results of their war against mortality have not been promising. The human body, it seems, is designed to perish.

But in a “symbiosis” of brain and machine, the body is dispensable, even upgradeable. Ray Kurzweil, a director of engineering at Google, is an evangelist of the idea that we are very close to uploading a human brain onto a computer. We will transfer ourselves onto beautiful, powerful and transient bodies. Who would have thought that singularity, which was once considered the moment when a machine became self-aware (and somehow evil), would come to mean the moment when a human became a machine?

Tech billionaires have long been paranoid about the sentient machine. Musk keeps talking about it. He has even said the “symbiosis” will save us from our fate as the “house cats” of machines.

I believe there are two major reasons why tech billionaires are so obsessed with the idea of machines taking over the world. One is that they consider themselves so intellectually and socially advanced that they cannot be afraid of anything merely human. The other reason is in the innate need of every human to feel oppressed by a superior force, and they are unable to feel oppressed by humans, so they see a bit too much in “artificial intelligence” to get their quota of oppression.

The brain machine interface, in its response to billionaire concerns, attempts to mechanize human frailty and humanize machine villainy.

All this might seem fanciful at the moment. There is more spurious science that involves the words “electrodes attached to the brain” than spurious anthropology that starts with, “In hunter-gatherer societies…” A few years ago, scientists who attached electrodes to a man’s brain even declared him the happiest man alive, even though he was French. The fact is we know very little about the brain, and the nature of thought and consciousness, and where the idea of self comes from.

But this does not mean the brain is sacred. As Musk said last week with passing scorn, “The brain is not some mystical thing”. The human brain might be hackable even if we do not understand everything about them.

In the book, From Bacteria To Bach And Back, the writer and scientist Daniel Dennett attempts to deglamourise the human mind. He argues that accidents and favourable circumstances can convert matter not only into complex organs like the eye and the heart, but also the mind. “Brains are more like termite colonies than intelligently designed corporations or armies.” He also holds that neurons, the cells that form the nervous system, evolved from ancient microbes. They, “are in effect the domesticated descendants of very ancient eukaryotes…Composed of billions of idiosyncratic neurons that evolved to fend for themselves, the brain’s functional architecture is more like a free market than a “politburo” hierarchy where all tasks are assigned from on high.”

The idea of thought seems special to thinkers, but contrary to our instincts, there might be nothing special about the mind, and the idea of self may not be beyond the general pointlessness of life. And all of philosophy might be just a set of dim questions asked too early in the life of science.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, who tweets at @manujosephsan





Democracy is going to get more democratic, and worse


2019-07-28

Over the past few days, millions of people in Karnataka realized that they had wasted their time queuing up to cast their votes and posting pictures of their stained finger on Instagram. The legislators they had elected resigned to favour the very party they had been elected to subdue. In general political opinion, they had sold their souls. Familiar sights followed: Political parties herded their legislators into air-conditioned buses, transferred them to luxury hotels where they were sequestered so that they were not poached, and those who were already poached were not re-bought. I wonder what is more demeaning—to be a sell-out, or to be hidden away in a resort because your boss thinks you are a potential sell-out? The herding of legislators is an enduring and recurring mascot of Indian politics, and a part of the global reminders this month that the world’s most adored idea, democracy, is going to get a lot worse in the coming years.

In Britain, a bumbling, ignorant and an unremarkable man became prime minister. In the United States, there is already such a man in place who has demonstrated that almost all the theories that the elite American press had propagated on what makes an electable president are wrong. These men may not be as useless as intellectuals allege, but they are certainly not men who make democracy look like a great idea.

Yet, when we see the young in Hong Kong taking great risks to demand democracy from China, we are trained to accept that their fight is worth it all, that democracy is worth it all. Democracy has become one of those sacred things whose inherent morality is above question. But then I do wonder if Hong Kong’s activists are fighting merely for the emergence of daft, poachable men.

The flaws of democracy have always been known to its greatest champions. But all along we were told that the thing about the idea of democracy is that it will get better with time. The idea that democracy will evolve into something greater was not a result of a confusion about the nature of democracy, but about evolution. We are trained to think that evolution is a transformation into something better, because that is how humans imagine they appeared—as an improved ape. But evolution is merely change.

In the transmission of ideas and news, the pundits have fallen. People are free to receive information from comforting sources and to transmit news, feeling the glory of being celebrities to 15 followers. Technology is ensuring that democracy is increasingly representing human minds accurately, and we did not anticipate that it may not be a flattering phenomenon. The evangelists of democracy themselves lament that the problem with democracy today is that there is too much of it.

When Barack Obama’s campaign first used social media to influence American voters, it had the blessings of the elite media. He may have been a political outsider, but in many significant ways, like his academic degrees, he was an insider in the intellectual aristocracy that ran his nation. That is why his use of Facebook was celebrated. But when, eventually, Donald Trump used it to reach his constituency, Facebook itself was defamed as a villainous Russian platform.

Even as recently as 2016, there was a mainstream intellectual view that the natural progressive evolution of all democracies is towards direct democracy, when people will vote on a range of issues via referendums, without intermediaries. In 2011, activist Prashant Bhushan told me: “Our democracy is based on the technology that was available in the 1940s. Now that we have more powerful technologies, the scope of democracy, too, must expand.” But then, Brexit made many intellectuals change their mind about the virtues of referendums. They now feel that the world has to be protected from people who don’t think like them.

Democracy, naturally, is not in a crisis for a large mass of people, especially those who feel they have been liberated from the old elite. The supporters of Trump, Brexit and Narendra Modi, and others who do not respect The New York Times or The Economist may believe that democracy has finally gotten better, and fairer. The perception of democracy might be subjective, at least for the moment, before the effects of the new class of leaders become clear, but there is no escaping the inherent flaw of electoral democracy, which is the “electoral” part.

It was this idea of competition that the early evangelists of democracy had thought will make democracy evolve into something more moral and effective. We tend to think highly of the corrective power of competition because the story is usually told by the victors. Our own ape story is told by us and not the apes whom we obliterated.

Peter Thiel, the co-founder of PayPal and a venture capitalist, has argued that in business, competition is destructive because it forces companies that do not make differentiated products to squander away all their resources on the battle and in undercutting the rival. “Monopoly is the condition of every successful business,” he writes in his book Zero To One.

Monopoly, in an electoral democracy, is a contradiction. Major political parties in India whose politicians are largely undifferentiated products, are in a state of perpetual corrosive war that has a profound effect on actual governance. In the future, elections will be even more expensive than they are today. But there will always be luxury resorts worthy of hosting men who are for sale.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Is being boorish an important Indian characteristic?


2019-07-31

Indians can switch to the acting mode very fast. Something about the Indian way of life requires hamming. Showing respect for elders and offering to pay restaurant bills are almost folk dances. Often a whole family is the cast, walking out to the stage with no rehearsal. This many of us saw a few days ago in a viral video that showed an Indian family in a Bali resort. They had been caught by the hotel staff trying to make off with various objects from their room.

The head of the family acts surprised. He asks his folks why they had to steal these trivial things when he could buy them stuff worth “50 lakhs”. His wife keeps asking him “to pay up”. One family member tries to touch the feet of a hotel staffer—but it is only an intent, with his hand reaching for the crotch instead of the feet. They had behaved very differently before they were caught. As a member of the hotel staff says towards the end: “You were yelling at us, now you are cooling down. Why were you yelling?”

Indians who watched this video on social media were disgusted. Not at what the Indian family had done, but more likely at the fact that they had got caught. Already, Indians are among the most despised tourists in the world. Recently Hotel Arc-En-Ciel in the Swiss town of Gstaad put out a notice for their “Dear guests from India”, in which the hotel asked them not to be too loud in common areas, or behave in a cheap manner to save money on food, or make a mess at the breakfast buffet.

Indians were in such a mood to self-flagellate this week that most of them, it appeared, were more ashamed than offended. They had good reasons, though, to be offended. A racist view need not be entirely incorrect about a race or nationality, yet it is unintelligent because the potential to be wrong about some Indians does not justify being right about most Indians. Yet, we also know that if the hotel had not insulted its Indian guests in this manner, it would not have got the message across.

An Indian in a first world nation is tame when he is alone. But when he is in the company of friends and family, he becomes emboldened. He is mostly scared of White waiters and flight crew, but is confident to boss around Asians and Africans.

I believe that the primary problem of Indians, especially those who have not been co-opted into the global cultural orphanage, who are instead culturally rooted, is with the idea of order. In India, they observe a social order, like caste norms, but require civic chaos to feel human. They suffer in rich nations because after their early days of enchantment, they grow tired of the civic order, the hold of a straight-line civilization, the confusion of a social order where even men on a garbage truck have so much swag.

Coming from a nation where at any given moment someone is high and someone is low, an Indian seeks the reassurance of social rank in bad behaviour—in shouting at people, and playing loud music and trashing a place.

Something about being considerate is mistaken for humility in India and something about true humility is mistaken for defeat. Humility, for most Indians, is what they do when they are hamming. In fact, Indians “feel humbled” only when they are about to brag about something good that has happened to them.

The global Indian lout emerges from the domestic Indian lout. India puts up with atrocious behaviour. Indians who are concerned about the nation’s global image need to start at home. My friend who runs a hotel in Manali told me that as Indians become more prosperous, there appears to be an endless procession of guests who know that if they find a good problem, they will get a full refund. They are empowered by the new democracy unleashed by travel websites, which allows them to harm hotels by rating them.

There are, of course, far worse louts than Indians. British and American, for instance, who do not need to be among others of their tribe to behave poorly, who are culturally and racially confident enough to do whatever they wish. At least Indians fear that if they get into trouble in foreign nations, their embassy will be totally useless. But the most annoying modern Caucasian lout is the sanctimonious hipster who infests ecologically fragile places and tries to admonish others, especially Asians, on how they must conduct themselves. About two years ago, Condé Nast magazine sent me to Antarctica and I never missed a chance to be entertained by an American who somehow thought Asians were more likely to step on penguins. Eventually, I watched in satisfaction as a fur seal chased him on a beach.

On that cruise, I enjoyed the company of Indians who were festive, cheerful, informed and danced the best. In places where we are allowed to make a noise, our rustic informality radiates a certain incomparable human warmth.

In our fear of brown boorishness, we must not end up entirely imitating the Western reserve. Like the Japanese, who have become perplexing even to themselves.

I had my own experience as a boorish Indian in Japan when on a bullet train I joined a dozen Indians in laughing aloud at a joke. A Japanese passenger told our handler: “Teach these Indians some Japanese manners.”

For the rest of the journey we were quiet and elegant. Being refined, after all, is method acting.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’.





Art can teach entrepreneurs how to deal with shame


2019-08-05

The saints of prey love a good suicide. They feed on it by assigning their own malady of interest as the cause of death. Dalit—oppression; Brahmin engineering student—academic pressure; farmer—debt and capitalism; Assamese—the National Register of Citizens. A rich Indian upper-caste middle-aged male is among the few who are allowed to kill themselves out of clinical depression. But the suicide of V.G. Siddhartha, the founder of Café Coffee Day, reminded us of some national maladies.

The police plan to interpret a letter he is believed to have dictated to a secretary as his “dying declaration”. If you wish to believe mainstream scientific opinion that a suicide is too complex to be attributed to a single cause, and that it is primarily a consequence of mental health, a suicide note will emerge as disproportionately overvalued in arriving at the “cause” of a death. Still, what people choose to mention in their final moments always has great value to us all. He wrote: “My intention was never to cheat or mislead anybody, I have failed as an entrepreneur.”

He probably knew that Indians have little sympathy for rich men who fail—if they are alive. As news of his death spread, people paid him tributes on social media, which included recounting their happy memories in his cafés. If he had chosen to live, and had fled the country to evade taxes and other financial obligations, the same mourners would have abused him. A wealthy man has to drown, lie as corpse on sand as a spectacle for television cameras, to be allowed some consideration.

Reacting to the death, billionaire Anand Mahindra said: “…entrepreneurs must not allow business failure to destroy their self-esteem.”

But is this possible? If self-esteem is a fabrication of success and luck, why must not failure and tough luck destroy it? How then must we deal with failure? Maybe there are some things that entrepreneurs can learn from artists even though there is much that they should disrespect.

If you look around, almost everyone is a failure; almost everyone is in some stage of failure. Most people do badly. It is from this that success derives its very meaning. The worth of success is in the norm of failure. Yet, people are ashamed of failure. And they flock to that spurious industry called motivational talks, which is based on the lie that there is a clear path to success. What the speakers never mention are three facts—the element of luck in their lives, which includes family wealth and social equity that makes all other causes irrelevant; their secret capacity for corrupt behaviour; and the contribution of their mental anomalies, like capacity for sociopathic behaviour, that has great professional advantages but cannot be replicated.

Very often these days, I meet men in their forties who had high corporate positions but were forced by office politics, or boredom, or the lure of a fad, to become entrepreneurs. And, as they get nowhere, they swing between wise bitterness and hope, which is chiefly a conversation with oneself and a premonition of defeat. They are a lot like many writers and filmmakers who need a break. But, unlike in the arts, in business most metrics of success are easy to measure. Entrepreneurs cannot hide in subjectivity or morality or in non-profits.

Artists can find acclaim that is disproportionate to the success of their creation if they have the right friends or the right political wound. Also, artists can promote failure itself as proof of their talent. And, they are rewarded for expressing their weakness, sorrows and even mental ailments. Entrepreneurs, on the other hand, have to exude joy, sanity, clarity and hope. As a result, they have fewer places to hide. So what is it that entrepreneurs can learn from artists?

We assume that an entrepreneur is driven by practicality, compromise and consensus in his goal to achieve a material end, while an artist will not appease anyone and is willing to undergo great hardships to win his freedom to do as he or she likes. I have no quarrels with these assumptions, except that the pure entrepreneur and the pure artist do not exist. There is a merchant and an artist combined in all of us. Artists see this more clearly than entrepreneurs and that is their secret. Most artists, even honest talented artists, do make very practical and even commercial decisions.

Entrepreneurs, too, must find the artist in them. The best among them do. They invoke the artist in them when they rate poverty above compromise and values above consensus and quality above profits. A few days ago, a Hindu customer of Zomato refused to accept a Muslim rider, but the company did not relent. Deepinder Goyal, the company’s co-founder, tweeted: “We aren’t sorry to lose any business that comes in the way of our values.”

Very often in business practicality is overrated and integrity is underrated. What good artists know is that integrity is not the moral high stand of charlatans; rather, integrity is a form of logic—integrity tells you that in a situation there is only one way of doing something right; and practicality gives you a million ways to do something wrong.

From the logic of artistic integrity entrepreneurs too can derive joy, and the humour not to revere humanity so much that mere failure is a trauma, and the power not to be shamed until we grant the world the right to shame us.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Let us grant Kashmir freedom from Indian aesthetics


2019-08-12

When Indian politicians talk of “development” we know that they mean clearing forests and shaving hills to spread a viral small town, planting an “eight-lane” highway on which no one follows the lanes, amoeba-like golf courses, and malls that are called “plazas” or even malls. A few years ago, the Goan government even classified coconut palms as grass so that the builders can raze them without permission. Much thought goes into the ugliness of the great republic.

So, when India promises “development” to Kashmir, anyone who has seen that exquisite place will be terrified even if he is not a career alarmist. Now that India has politically co-opted Kashmir beyond ambiguity, I propose we grant it freedom from Indian urban aesthetics and from that amiable Indian tourist, who can trash a whole hill in no time, and who shadows white women beseeching them for selfies. You may want to argue it is very “elitist” to deny Kashmiris the dismal smog of “development”, and to deny Indian tourists the right to do to Kashmir what they have done to Shimla and Manali and Ooty. I do not wish to quarrel with you on that matter today; instead, I will seed a thought: Can Kashmir be a Bhutan, without the farce of official happiness, where a high price tag regulates human traffic for a greater moral cause? In fact, can Kashmir be the start of a more intelligent form of urban planning and tourism in India?

How did it come to be that the astonishing integration of Kashmir, a political masterstroke, has so easily acquired the moral masquerade of development? How did a nation that could not “develop” vast regions in its firm control have the confidence to officially integrate a reluctant state in the name of progress?

On most days, if not all, an average Kashmiri resident has a better quality of life than most Indians. He lives in a better home than an average person in Mumbai; he is in the proximity of great beauty, breathes clean air and, in the winters, he even skis down one of the best slopes in the world. I would argue that in recent times he has faced far lower risk of a human rights violation than an average poor Indian because of the political spin given to any such violation. And, crimes against women are low. But progress is always about change and overrating change, and for long the young of Kashmir have felt the rot of a life without prospects. In their hierarchy of wants, “development” was much higher than what their liberal handlers let on.

When Kashmiris argue among themselves what do they argue about? What are the two sides? Do they have two sides? A “debate” where everyone says the same things to people who have similar views is called a litfest. Everywhere else, among people who are not obsolete in their own time, who debate in bazaars and restaurants, they spar over conflicting ideas. For long, the most influential ambassadors of Kashmir have only transmitted the hypothesis that all Kashmiris wish for independence from India.

This was promoted by the sort of person who was born with the loudest megaphone: an upper-caste Kashmiri feudal lord who was made to feel like a social underdog by the Indian state, who knew how to talk to the Western liberal elite, who knew what an “op-ed” was, who made up for all his literary limitations through the hyperbole of homelessness and subjugation.

Do you know of a society today where such a person and the poor agree on an issue? Do sophisticates and the poor have identical views on politics anymore? So, why has the world not heard the other side? In a polarized world, where is the polarization in Kashmir? The most fervent wish of the average Kashmiri was so drowned in the noise of making India the villain that Narendra Modi’s liberation of Kashmir from its own elite in the name of “development” may actually turn out to be a popular move in the region.

A few years ago, I interviewed several Kashmiris, most of whom were not activists or writers or politicians; many of them had never been interviewed before. They were tired of politics, they were ready to move on, they were ready to be co-opted by India if that would bring them jobs and prosperity, because being co-opted by their elite did not get them anywhere. Some of Kashmir’s cultural elite, too, wished to move on. “But we can’t say it, you know,” one of them told me, “we can’t say it publicly without a lot of our brothers from Dubai and America abusing us.” The young spoke of wanting the trappings of progress, and multinationals and malls, and cricket matches and fun. They made me swear that I will not quote them because they would be shamed on social media by their elite, including those who lived good lives in New York and Dubai.

After I reported this attitude in a story titled Sorry, Kashmir Is Happy, a few more educated and frustrated youth cautiously opened up to me. One young man wrote to me saying that Kashmir is represented in the global media “by a certain section of people who impose their political ideology on others”.

I do hear now and then from my Kashmiri foes, too, who are chiefly artistic. Every time something bad happens in Kashmir, they lampoon me by saying, “Kashmir is happy.” They fear happiness, because it is trauma that keeps their politics alive. I do not say Kashmir is happy today, but then in this world, it is hard to escape happiness.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





The beautiful loneliness of not believing in heroes


2019-08-18

In the television series, The Boys, which released on Amazon Prime Video three weeks ago, a band of superheroes appears to save the world every day through heroic actions. But what seems to be a version of Avengers soon reveals itself as something far cleverer. The superheroes in The Boys are employees of a giant establishment, Vought International, that assigns them their heroic tasks, most of which are for media consumption. The masses love the superheroes for being good people, but in reality they are plain evil. One is psychotic; another is a marine-ecology conscious guy and a sexual harasser; yet another is a mercenary; some are lesser-evil, mere sell-outs with a conscience who are unable to resist their establishment’s offering of money, fame, respect and a career. I have never seen a more convincing gathering of good folks.

In that way, The Boys is a political fact about the true nature of evil—that it has long split into two: (a) what looks evil, and (b) what looks good.

The television spectacle, which is based on a comic book series by Garth Ennis and Darick Robertson, is an amusing reflection of the real world in many other ways. Barring one superhero, all the other “supes” of Vought are dispensable because there are many with similar abilities. So there is a whole population of “supes” who need to catch the establishment’s eye, who need a break, who need to be marketed as superheores. The establishment, now and then, picks up an ordinary “supe” who has other attributes like beauty, articulation and a certain demographic appeal, and declares something like, “a star is born”. And a star is born.

This is how the establishment maintains its power. By controlling acclaim and subjectivity. When success is a lottery, the casino always wins in the long run.

The “supes” are remarkably similar to most heroes in the real world in another aspect: they go for the low-hanging fruit. What the superheroes never take on is the real evil—the very establishment that funds them. They also fabricate villains because there can be no hero without an arch-villain. But the “supes” do not have one crucial gift that most heroes in the real world possess—the power of delusion. The “supes” do not imagine they are saving the world; they know they are evil.

Of whom in the real world do the “supes” remind you?

The beauty of The Boys is that it shows the hero and the villain are the same figure. In the real world, too, one man’s hero is another’s villain. To refined global villagers, the evil “supes” are popular politicians, except Barrack Obama. Also, spiritual gurus, commercially successful writers and actors. To the rest of the world, the “supes” are the refined global villagers themselves, and the whole spectrum of their heroes: Magsaysay winners, Nobel prize winners in peace, literature and economics, “literary” novelists, conscientious comedians and “political economists”.

But I believe that the right way of seeing the “supes” is to put every single hero in this category. Every hero is a fabrication of an establishment.

What happens when we lose faith in heroes? We will feel a deep yawning loneliness but it is the majestic quiet of clarity, like the moment we realized our deepest belief was wrong; or when we chose to have high standards for lovers and friends; or the time when we decided we will not try to fit in, or very simply the times when we did the right thing. People who do not believe in heroes search harder for the meaning of a heroic action. And in that way they understand their world in more complex ways that the establishment teaches them.

In The Boys, the war against the superheroes is waged by a band of ordinary people with no prospects, who are powerless, flawed, scared, good in simple ways, confused, and motivated by self-interest. They want revenge because the heroes had harmed them.

In the real world, millions of them created Fox News. This is the subject of another television series, The Loudest Voice, which released late June. It is the dramatised tale of Roger Ailes, the former chairman and CEO of Fox News, the channel that ended the domination of the liberal point of view on American television and eventually contributed to the rise of Donald Trump. When Ailes, played by Russel Crowe, imagined Fox in the 1990s, mainstream news appealed only to the sophisticates “who drank cappuccino”. Aisles knew there was nothing for “the deli, coffee-to-go, extra sugar crowd”, the majority. In a moment in the first episode, he lays out his plan: “Right now in America, 60% of people think that the media is negative, that it’s full of lies, full of bias, full of crap. We’re just gonna give the people what they want, a positive message, an American message, wrapped up in a conservative viewpoint.”

Fox News swiftly diminished the prevailing superheroes of American journalism. Later, when Obama loomed, Ailes would make his anchors mention Obama’s middle name “Hussein” to promote the wrong notion that he was Muslim. Obama was too great a hero for Ailes to destroy, but he was still a “supe” to millions of whites who did not adore him, and his heroic stint did help Fox whip up enough hate to create its own “supe”, Donald Trump.

“Supes” come and go in this world, and establishments grow stronger; and only those who do not believe in heroes know what is going on.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





What Savarkar could yet do for the future of Hindutva


2019-08-25

On behalf of my boyhood, I thank the Indian National Congress and its intellectual franchisees for erasing many chapters from history textbooks, which were already dreary. One of the chapters was Vinayak Savarkar, who invented Hindutva about a hundred years ago. I wish the screw gauge and vernier callipers, too, had been involved in Hindutva.

The erasure of Savarkar by intellectuals 1.0 was so complete that at the end of it all he was not even a villain. He was not mentioned in textbooks even as one of the accused in the assassination of Mahatma Gandhi.

Over the decades, Savarkar’s rehabilitation was attempted by his admirers and those who needed a hero outside the Nehruvian Avengers series. Actually, he was the sort of man who needed to be rehabilitated when he was still alive, and it was tried. But his resurrection has succeeded only recently, since the rise of another man, Narendra Modi.

This month, two absorbing and distinct biographies of Savarkar were released: The True Story Of The Father Of Hindutva by Vaibhav Purandare and Echoes From A Forgotten Past, 1883-1924 by Vikram Sampath.

It is impossible to tell the story of Savarkar without laughing at India’s most loved nonsense: that India won its independence from the British because of “non-violent” walkathons led by one man. There was, of course, always the other view: that India was freed by armed rebels, or “extremists”, many of whom were tortured and killed by the British. Both sides are exaggerations that do not consider the outsized role of Britain’s destruction in the world wars.

What the two books establish, though, is that the invention of Hindu nationalism gave the freedom movement a menacing heft. Several men before Savarkar attempted to consolidate Hinduism, and even reform it. But they were religious men and so they were blind to something important. Hinduism was not built on magic. Savarkar was an atheist, and his insight was that Hinduism was a powerful political identity that does not require gods, or even the cow actually, whom he did not love very much, and that Hinduism is a fundamental genetic force in all Indians. In this way, he invented Hindutva.

What is the future of Hindutva? Are people who believe in Hindutva good people? In the first place, was the man who invented Hindutva a good man?

The canonization of Savarkar points to the extraordinary health of the Vatican that controls contemporary Hindutva. It is important to note that rehabilitation does not mean something charlatan. For instance, vast tracts of the two mentioned biographies are convincing. They easily demolish the foolish argument that Savarkar was a coward. Yes, he wrote letters begging to be released from the horrific Cellular Jail in the Andamans, but that was only smart. A man who does not know fear is insane. A man who knows fear and still puts himself in a position where his darkest fears may come true, is probably very brave.

But was Savarkar a good man?

Purandare does not hide Savarkar’s professed hatred for Muslims. In his early years as a revolutionary, Savarkar asked Hindus and Muslims to get along, but eventually he wished to subdue Muslims. In trying to explain the shift, Purandare makes an important connection. Several Muslims manned the Cellular Jail, and they appeared to have harmed Savarkar.

Intellectuals tend to give fancy reasons for why some men hate some things, but the truth is often simple. It is personal. Savarkar’s own experience of Muslims made him a passionate transmitter of the idea of Hindutva to others who had such experiences, and today it attracts even those who have never had a bad moment with Muslims. It derives its power from the same quality that makes “the right-wing” itself powerful worldwide: relevance.

Most famous ideas are noble, but there is no correlation between nobility and relevance. Hindutva is grey. It is not constricted by unnatural moralities, hence, has exceptional freedoms to get things done.

But it cannot survive in India for too long in opposition to other faiths. Hindutva has to become an unambiguously moral force, like other grey ideas did. And it will constantly push its syndicate to find sly but moral ways to protect Hindus. What do you think India’s latest push for population control is about?

I have a theory that Baba Ramdev’s tongue foreruns some of Modi’s policies. Don’t forget Ramdev was the first to speak of banning large currency notes. A few weeks ago, he mentioned population control. Days later, on 15 August, Modi spoke about the matter, even though in many states the Indian population is plateauing. In general, when people speak of population control, they do not necessarily mean the reduction of human births, but of particular sections of them. Any strong population policy would address a wide Hindu concern that Muslims are growing at a faster rate than Hindus.

Savarkar can help Hindutva in its transformation into a moral force for current times. For instance, he hated the worship of cows. He even suggested that Hindus eat beef, if their survival depended on it.

Purandare and Sampath portray the inventor of Hindutva as a flawed man, but also a man who was scientific, moral, sly in a self-preservative way, and physically fit. Not such a bad icon, if some of his angry tweets can be erased, just as Gandhi’s view of African Blacks as inferior humans was erased.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





The secrets of fitness that no government will tell you


2019-09-01

All thin people are alike, as Leo Tolstoy never said, but all fat people are fat in different ways. That is a type of diversity India has finally decided not to celebrate. Never before has a government spoken so much about health, even though the closest any of Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s ministers has ever come to a convincing yogic pose was once when Suresh Prabhu got into shavasana, and dozed off. But there can be no doubt that when Modi launched the Fit India Movement on Thursday, it was his most moral and intelligent campaign. However, there are many things he could not say:

1) The popular mascot of fitness is a visual of physical activity, but it is a small part of fitness. After people cross early youth their health will be decided mostly by what they eat. This is why most amateur long distance runners in India have a paunch.

2) Sugar is evil. Like other forms of evil, it hides in culture, celebration, happiness, and in your mama’s love.

3) Walking is not an exercise if you are not very old. Walking and then drinking chai with a biscuit is not healthy living. It is the same as imbecility.

5) Orange juice is not a health drink. Also, orange juice is not orange.

6) The food industry is largely an unethical industry. All “healthy” breads are, for all practical reasons, sugar. “Brown” bread is mostly maida, which is sugar, mixed with a brown colouring agent.

7) Also, technically, bread is foam.

8) In India, if you add fructose to your food product instead of sucrose, you can legally claim, “No Added Sugar”. Fructose is not only sugar but worse than sucrose.

9) Moderation is a foolish idea. It is ambiguous, conciliatory, democratic and sentimental, and often a front to eat what you should not eat. Abstinence has the clarity of clear logic. It gives you direction. It’s like integrity—all or nothing.

10) That “being human” means being flawed has to be a myth first promoted by sugar addicts.

11) Fatness is a type of sorrow. And the true nature of most sorrows is boredom, which people extinguish through the entertainment of eating.

12) Invoking feminism to consume sugar is not feminism; it is called eating.

13) It is not a bad idea to be an ascetic six days a week and feast like a fool on one day.

14) People who perform intense physical exercise usually do so not to lose weight, but because they love sports or are addicted to oxytocin and other chemicals of joy, which is not conducive for poetry or activism.

15) The body tricks us. It does not wish to work hard. In every sphere of human activity, the body’s message is “this is fine, this is enough”. The fitter we are, higher the bar for our body to lie to us.

16) If you perform physical exercise every day you will know that you are not a lazy person. Then when your body asks you not to push it too much, you know it is not laziness speaking but something serious.

17) The food industry is not required to carry warnings for sugar, even though it is as dangerous as tobacco. When some things are condemned and some things are not, people tend to believe that what is not condemned is fine.

18) The problem with health “influencers” is the same that all motivational speakers pose. What they are saying is, “be like us”, which is useless advice. Health icons appear to achieve difficult things because their bodies are special or unique, or through madness or other aspects of their personalities that are not easy to imitate. We should find our own secret ways to do the hard things that will keep us fit. For instance, we should use our disorders, fears, joblessness, happiness, anger, vanity, love or adoration of sex to push our bodies harder.

19) There is no such thing as discipline. As this column once argued, most of what is mistaken as discipline is often a public front of very private procedures.

20) The problem with a fitness trend is not that it is a trend. The problem with a trend is in how it is transmitted. When good news travels as fast as bad news, then the force behind the transmission is usually the naive who are new to what they are transmitting. A fitness trend is almost always transmitted by excitable unhealthy people, just as mental peace trends are almost always transmitted by restless minds that make a big deal of mere calm breathing. In time, a trend transmitted by such ambassadors loses credibility, and that is how it becomes a mere trend.

21) Most doctors are unreliable. They don’t know much about fitness. Or they have a low bar for health. If you are not dying, they don’t take you seriously. As a result, most of them say things you should dismiss.

22) I asked Nandita Chakraborty, a highly regarded general practitioner, what the most common misconceptions Indians had about health were. She said: Indians overrate cow’s milk, and “mother’s food”; and they are still covertly ashamed if their children are lean. She also said, “People don’t listen anymore but they do listen to doctors—every general practitioner has 15 minutes of compete attention from another human but they squander it. They don’t say anything transformative or important to their patients. But the ones who mess up the most are parents—they give their children terrible habits.”

23) “They f*** you up, your mum and dad. They may not mean to, but they do”—Philip Larkin.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





The right way to threaten Indians into driving well


2019-09-09

Observe the guy who has been driving like a moron and has finally crashed—he is stunned. It is the same expression on the man who is driving on the wrong side of the national highway and sees a truck coming at him—he is baffled.

Only the cow, which crosses the road like an Indian, is not surprised by things. Human Indians, on the other hand, are constantly startled by the most natural outcome of their actions. In fact, the national emotion of India is surprise. A few days ago, when the government finally increased fines for traffic violations by many times, Indians were, again, baffled.

The move to make fines hefty is an excellent idea. Union transport minister Nitin Gadkari justified the high fines by saying he wants Indians to fear the law. This is part of an on-going reformation of Indians. Keep the nation clean, pay taxes and don’t drive like a moron. But Gadkari missed an important step between threatening Indians and getting them to do the right things.

First, let me invoke a national mystery: Why is it that Indians do not spit or litter when they are in the Delhi Metro system? The same people who have no notions of civic respect, who in fact demonstrate a conscious disrespect for public spaces, surrender their feral freedoms on the Delhi Metro. This phenomenon holds across all filthy cities that are building or expanding modern Metro systems.

I believe that we can understand civic order in the Delhi Metro without the hilarious hypothesis of the sweet conscientious Indian.

When Delhi Metro opened its shutters, it was an extraordinary service and unprecedented in a nation that had until then viewed good design and air-conditioning as too much of a luxury for the majority. (Even the private sector had that view. Once, a top executive of a call centre in Gurgaon told me: “The swanky office is to impress the foreign client. Some of our people who work inside, I know they would be happy in a cowshed.”)

Initially, the poor among commuters were mildly intimidated by the Delhi Metro. It was the first time that they had been allowed entry into a space that had escalators, automatic doors and clear instructions pasted everywhere. Yet, they were not in a swanky mall, they were not trespassers trying to steal cool air or glimpses of the rich. Those days, labourers and maids were so overwhelmed that they whispered instead of speaking aloud. Now, they have got used to the service.

The Delhi Metro was, and still is, the anti-matter of India. Trains arrived when the electronic board said they would, even when the time displayed was not divisible by five or 10. As the Delhi Metro was excellent at most things it did, commuters took seriously its threat of heavy fines for spitting and throwing garbage. The system conveyed that if it can run such a good service, it also knows how to fine.

The nature of stature is that it is something people grant and then they are awestruck by the very thing they themselves have granted. Delhi Metro has stature. Also, the trains and the platforms are so well designed that commuters have very little reason to violate its codes.

Of course, there are moments when India triumphs over the Delhi Metro, but most of the time the Metro prevails. Because it first created all the facilities, and then tutored, pleaded, threatened and implemented its threats.

Indian roads, on the other hand, are poorly designed and managed. Most countries in plain sight look richer than they really are. Indian roads make India look much poorer than what it is.

I live in Gurugram, where traffic signals hide behind trees, most roads do not have markers for pedestrians to cross and, like most Indians, they never really cross the road; rather, they flee death with that sheepish expression of being encroachers in their own city. And, the face of the government, the cops, elicit no respect, not only because of their reputation, but also because of how they look, their cheap uniforms and how they wear those uniforms, and how they place barricades squeezing dense traffic into zig-zag formations, India’s definition of “security”, and how they sit on the roadside on plastic chairs, their large paunches like babies on their laps; and how six of them hide under flyovers to pounce on motorists in the great game that is the Indian daily life.

What India’s traffic system has not learned from Delhi Metro is that for a threat of fines to be effective, you should first win the respect of those you threaten.

This is exactly the reason why the Swachh Bharat movement, too, has had very little success. Why Mahatma Gandhi failed in this matter is very different from why Narendra Modi might. Gandhi commanded immense respect, but he failed because the greatest ambassador of political disruption and civic disorder cannot simultaneously be an icon of order. And cleanliness is entirely about order. Modi is a far more influential icon of order, but his cleanliness project may yet be doomed because its agencies have not won the respect of Indians through the excellence of their services.

Order makes Indians unhappy. They will use any ruse to romanticize and pursue chaos. If the government does not build its stature, its high fines will not control the wizards of chaos. The same incompetence of the system that designs bad roads will ensure that the market forces of bribery will enable cops and motorists to arrive at a happy equilibrium.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





The other difficult things Modi should make us all do


2019-09-15

Reforming India is harmful for the reformer, and professional politicians usually never try it. M.G. Ramachandran (MGR) was so popular as chief minister of Tamil Nadu that Tamil men wept upon seeing him, as though they had lost a lunar lander, but he never did anything to reform them. Rather, he only appeased them; he made it legal for them to sit on the front crossbar of a bicycle, which was an offence until then. In response, Tamilians rejoiced on the streets. If only MGR had known the value of pi, he would have changed it from 3.14159…to just 3 to make it easier to measure a circle. But Prime Minister Narendra Modi is a different sort of leader. He has made cash vanish for several days; he has asked Indians to pay their taxes, exercise, eat less, and now his government has increased fines for traffic violations by many times. Yet, he thrives. Modi is so popular that he could help us accomplish some more difficult tasks. Here is a short list

• Most Indian buildings have double gates, as in a pair of gates that open or shut together. But Indians like to keep one of the gates shut. Forever. It’s a mystery why they do that. Shutting one of the gates makes vehicles squeeze through a narrow space for no good reason. As it is, half this nation is an ad for K-Y Jelly. Why should Indian life be a squeeze through narrow passageways?

• Female yoga instructors have to be sensitized to say things that men can understand. A typical yoga teacher will say something like this: “Imagine a string running through you, from your head and leaving your tail bone and is tied to that tree out there, which is now pulling you gentle…” This, while I lie there, the laggard of the class, hoping for a more equal world.

• Also, as Fit India is a government movement now, I propose that in all airports, the system of check-in baggage allowance be replaced with passenger weight plus baggage allowance. It is unfair that light people and heavy people should have the same baggage allowance when the luggage travels in the same plane as passengers (most of the time).

• And, gyms should be banned from playing music, as the only kind of songs they play are for an age group that does not go to the gym in any case. Recently, as I was trembling with an enormous weight over me, I heard a man’s voice sing: “I am sleeping like a sleeping maann”. Then a woman sang, “He has all I need but I don’t need it now.” Who are these people? What’s going on?

• People who take part in “marathons” only to walk all the way should be banned from the activity. They are a nuisance who block the way of more honest runners, all of it only to put up posts on social media. What validation do they need? Applause for walking? Some of them run only when their like-minded but amiably daft friend is taking a picture.

• Modi should consider mentioning in one of his speeches something most Indians do not know: The lift might be socially inferior to you, but still when you are waiting for a lift, you don’t ask it to come to you; you tell the lift where you want to go. You press the down arrow when you want to go down. And, when you want to go up, you press the up arrow. Do not press the down button, look up, and then push the up button.

• The MeToo movement should include naming and shaming men who perform the “naagin” dance at office parties.

• All Indians who invite people over for dinner should be, by law, made to serve dinner by 9pm at the latest.

• Indians should be weaned off their love for squeezing broke farm workers into paramilitary outfits and making them do meaningless tasks—like making cars go zig-zag and pretending to check their boots with their X-ray vision. Also, Modi should ask all Indians to stop saluting other Indians, especially the kind of saluting that involves stomping one leg. And, until the time saluting is banned, all guards should salute memsaabs, too.

• Business class passengers who are seated in their comfortable seats on aeroplanes should not be allowed to meet the eyes of economy passengers as the cattle class shuffles in.

• A person who bums a cigarette should not be expected to have a conversation with the donor just because a favour was done.

• In any political gathering, all chairs on the stage should be of the same size. And, once the event begins, no sidekick should be allowed to crawl on to the stage to whisper into a leader’s ears. This whispering by the sidekick on stage has been going on from the time of Mahatma Gandhi. What is it that the sidekicks say, exactly? What is it that cannot wait? When Apple CEO Tim Cook is on stage, do you see anyone tip-toeing to him and whispering something?

Actually, what is going on is that the sidekick is sharing the spotlight, showing his face, and thus conveying to all that he has the leader’s ear.

• Modi should ask North Indians to decide whether they want to touch an elder’s feet or not. This ambiguous, in-between act where they reach for the elder’s crotch instead of his feet should stop. Perhaps they should learn from South Indians. There exist instructional videos of men falling at the feet of the late J. Jayalalithaa—lie on belly in full stretch, and don’t move for many seconds.

• Indian cricketers should not open restaurants that the Indian hockey team cannot afford.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Hindi cannot colonize the South because it lacks value


2019-09-20

People who cannot pronounce “Kanimozhi” are trying to unify Indians. A few days ago, Union home minister Amit Shah, who many South Indians think is a North Indian, said that India needs a unifying language, and that the language is Hindi. He immediately unified half of India, for that is all it takes to make South Indians pretend that they love each other and that they are all the same. Then Tamil politicians, who are actually actors, and Tamil actors, who are actually politicians, lamented “the imposition”, an English word that is extremely difficult for most Tamilians to pronounce.

The fact is no one has tried to impose Hindi on the South. But I have no doubt that the current regime in Delhi dreams about an India where there is a single dominant language, which coincidentally they speak well. After all, there can be no nationalism without a national language. As things stand, there is no such thing as an Indian nationalist; there are only North-Indian nationalists.

In India, “national” tends to mean a thing that is not national. Like the tiger, peacock, hockey and Delhi. National is often someone’s regional stuff, just like culture is usually Brahmin folklore, and “global culture” is the local culture of Caucasians with some quaint distractions. The South has accepted many alien things as “national”, but it is too late for them to accept Hindi.

The people who want Hindi to be the national language wish that the South agrees to be colonized by the language. Then one half of India will not be so foreign to the other half, and a nationalistic Indian Prime Minister would not have to, absurdly, speak to the poorest Tamilians or patriotic space scientists in English.

But then, people do not surrender to a language to be “unified”. People learn languages that are useful. What is the use of Hindi? What are the rewards of learning Hindi?

Even parents are not very appealing if they are not useful. That is why it is easier for a poor man to revolt against his parents than it is for a rich man. All aspiring colonizers, like parents and cultural evangelists, must first ask in what way they are appealing to their prey.

Guess who surrendered to Hindi when it appeared to have a lure? Rajinikanth. He was willing to act as the hero’s sidekick in Hindi films so that he could have a shot at Mumbai’s film industry, which was at the time more lucrative than Tamil. So did Kamal Haasan, another Tamil actor. A language does not conquer through war; it slowly encroaches through rewards. Rajinikanth and Kamal Haasan, who failed in their efforts to become Hindi stars, today condemn Hindi’s attempt to trespass into their fiefdoms. This could be because that language was never useful to them.

English, unlike Hindi, has tremendous rewards. Most high-paying or respectable jobs that do not break the law require English. Actually, the elite do well primarily because they are the elite. But what radiates from their glow are the fables of their formal intellectual training. And the poor then imagine there is a way to succeed. English has been that spurious way.

Millions of poor families spend their hard-earned money on educating their children in English, who then undergo considerable suffering to learn a language that is not a part of their environment, and millions do realize that they cannot learn it well enough. Even so, English helps them occupy professions that the elite have vacated.

For Dalits, English is the bigger thug they pay protection money to in order to subdue the local thugs—all of Indian culture. But it is hard for them to pretend that the language belongs to them. India is too formidable to be defeated by cultural midgets, and English is a midget in India.

Despite its rewards, English is a cultural failure in India even among the affluent. In fact, it has retarded us. India has to be the only society in the world whose elite do not speak any language with complete mastery. Many of us are stranded in English and we speak our mother tongues or the languages that raised us very poorly. For instance, many of us cannot read high prose or even give a formal speech in an Indian language. But then, most educated Indians are in reality semi-literates in English, too. Once a disappointed reader wrote this review of one of my novels: “This book is hard to read. I am only half way through and already I have an extra vein on my forehead. Dude write in a simple language!! There are so many fancy words in the book…(like)… salesian, grimace, furtive, asterisks…”

This is a person who likes books, who pays money to buy books, and I think he has a point. I myself have a modest vocabulary for a novelist.

It is this vacuum that Amit Shah wants to fill with the charms of Hindi. But Hindi will fail not only for the same reasons as English, but also for being useless to the Indians he may hope to convert. “Unification” is intrinsically useless to people.

Many aspects of “national” are vacuous, and this is so across nations. The “national” sport of most nations are obscure even in those societies. Argentina’s national sport, for instance, is “pato”, in which a dog catcher rides on a horse. Football, the most popular sport in the world, is the “national sport” of very few nations.

The true heritage of a society is always what its intellectuals don’t fuss about “preserving”: food, local pop-culture, practical garments. And what a nation does not celebrate as its national-something is what is truly national.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Greta Thunberg and Bill Gates aren’t on the same side


2019-09-27

Over the past few days, many of us paid attention to two people who have the same goal. One is a loveable 16-year-old Swedish girl who believes the world is going to end, for which she holds capitalism responsible; and the other is a billionaire whose wealth equals about one-fifth of Sweden’s gross domestic product (GDP). Greta Thunberg has become the mascot of climate-alarm; Bill Gates is a hero from another time, once a mascot of much happier things, and “the only person on this earth who I’ve never heard complain about his wife”, a baffled man says in the new documentary, Inside Bill’s Brain, that was released on Netflix a few days ago.

Thunberg attracts people who are susceptible to believing any bleak and calamitous prognosis of the world. Gates is admired by prospering optimists who would admire any man who is worth $100 billion, and as a trade-off even listen to him talk about sanitation in poor nations.

Thunberg is particularly endearing to women, many of whom consider the girl’s critics “middle-aged men”, which is somehow a descriptive insult today. Several female commentators have used the language of psychiatry when they talk about men who hate Thunberg: “Why does she trigger men?” they ask. On social media, young women are representing Thunberg’s critics through a common meme that young women use to insult middle-aged men: A scene from Game Of Thrones in which a young woman is saying: “Uncle, please sit.” It’s a perplexing choice of meme, as it is from a series where “uncles” are no pushovers. Rather, they appear to get a lot of sex from young women.

Thunberg, for no fault of hers, has been co-opted and deified by the climate-alarm industry, which, like all of activism, believes that a bit of drama and exaggeration are absolutely justified for a great moral cause. Recently, a video of Thunberg staring at Trump became popular, with every share goading people to believe that she was giving him a dirty look. And people began to see exactly that, just as some people can be influenced to see human faces on Mars.

Gates is particularly endearing to men who imagine they have arrived at their beliefs by considering “all the facts” and through “logical reasoning”. They see in Gates a strategic, masculine solver of the problems of a weak, miserable world, all along aided by an appreciative wife.

Thunberg has Asperger’s syndrome and, through her, everyone in the world who feels vulnerable is reassured by activism, which is after all a flea market of human frailties. Inside Bill’s Brain, on the other hand, reaffirms the great strengths of a billionaire who can read 150 pages of a dense book in an hour “with 90% retention”, as a man says, though there is no way he can know what percentage Gates retains of his reading.

“How dare you!” Thunberg recently said to the adults who run the world. “You have stolen my dreams and my childhood with your empty words.” Human suffering, Gates says calmly in the documentary, as though with no emotion, “is a resource-constraint problem”.

Despite the differences between Thunberg and Gates, people are led to believe that they are on the same side in the war to control the climate. After all, they share the same goal. But then, goals are often glorified masks of methods. Our fiercest battles have never been over goals, but over methods. All religions and ideologies, and professors who are not sadists, have the same stated goal, which is the welfare of people, but they have fought for centuries over methods.

We care more for our methods than about the world.

Gates, whose foundation spends more money on health than the World Health Organization, is disliked by career activists who generally hate billionaire philanthropists seen to be encroaching on their precious turf and even, preposterously, trying to solve problems using science and corporate methods.

As a businessman, Gates is trained to be practical. A few days ago, he gave an award to Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, and a self-righteous member of the foundation quit in protest. But from the point of view of Gates, it is a good idea to honour Modi.

Also, Gates has the freedom to seek solutions for climate change in nuclear power, which is among the cleanest fuels. The foundational design of a civilian nuclear reactor that he is developing was laid out by two men, one of whom was Edward Teller, also known as “the father of the hydrogen bomb”.

It’s likely that if Greta Thunberg even suggests that nuclear power is a way to end climate change, she will suffer for it because such an idea is repulsive to the sort of people who have canonized her. An activist can only speak truth to people who really don’t matter to her—like heads of state. If she crosses humanitarians and some editors, her aura will fade.

In the future, she might be among the many powerful humanitarians who stand in the way of Bill Gates. The toughest part of Gates’ pursuit is not a quest for the kind of science that will end human miseries; it is battling reformers who have different ideas from him.

“Sometimes, you really have to say: Let’s give up,” he says towards the end of Inside Bill’s Brain. “Sometimes, you have to just say: I need to work harder.”





Why there exists no such thing as a global right wing


2019-10-04

In the British comedy Fleabag, a young woman is aroused by watching Barack Obama give a speech about democracy. The universality of the moment is in the fact that she could have been anywhere in the world and we could infer she believes in climate change and the liberation of Palestine.

Far less mesmerizing men than Obama have been global heroes—like Hugo Chávez, who was once treated like a rock star at Jawaharlal Nehru University. But all such public figures of various nationalities have one thing in common—they are humanitarians.

Strongmen, on the other hand, are usually local heroes, and if the world outside cares about them at all, it is usually as villains.

There appears to be much in common between “right wing” heroes of various nations, but they are never in alliance, like humanitarians can be.

Is there a global fellowship of strongmen who exchange jokes about Obama, Macron and Marx, and about the latest lament in The Guardian on “the rise of strongmen across the world”? Is there an intellectual festival for patriots from different nations where a Brahmin, a White and an Arab will argue why their groups are superior, what a nuisance poor migrants are, and how cultural diversity is just a device to get cheap waiters?

These concepts don’t exist, but not because people don’t think along these lines. They do. It is the “global” aspect of such a congregation that seems ridiculous. There is something odd about the idea of a “global nationalist”.

By nature, the “left wing” is global and the “right wing” is local. Of late, new Indian patriots have been trying to change this; they have been trying to form global alliances with conservatives in advanced economies. After all, the Indian patriot today is more suave than his earlier avatar. New nationalists are culturally and linguistically comprehensible to the West, and they are successful people in respectable professions.

But the global right is a futile exercise. There will never be such a thing.

After the Narendra Modi government integrated Kashmir with India beyond any ambiguity, the modern Indian patriot imagined US President Donald Trump would cheer. As though it was natural that Trump and Modi should get along because the same newspapers are critical of their leadership. Patriots even imagined that a global network of strongmen will support the nationalistic mojo of the move. But supporting Modi on Kashmir was clearly not the priority of “conservatives” across the world. Even so, The New York Times, The Washington Post, The Guardian, the BBC and Western liberal intellectuals who knew very little about India’s northern-most state magically acquired enough wisdom to bemoan the “suspension of freedom” and “the violation of human rights” and “the suffering” of Kashmiris.

Meanwhile, Fox News and The Sun did not magically acquire any right wing wisdom—that the poor of Kashmir have been liberated from their crooked elite, trauma merchants, terrorist middlemen and economic stagnation.

The “left” is a low-stakes human hive of hearts on auto-pilot that sees the world as a human hive of victims. The “right” is a high-stakes pre-occupation with what is locally relevant. The “left” is a monoculture of a European idea; the “right” is culture. All elites are like parents—conservative at home, where the stakes are high, and liberal elsewhere, an abstract place that is not as important as home.

It is not only the social right that is helplessly local.

Increasingly, the economic right, too, is shedding its evangelism of globalization as it does not serve its interests anymore. Last year, Trump told the United Nations, “We reject the ideology of globalism and we embrace the doctrine of patriotism.”

There are, of course, a few global right-wing figures. Hitler, for instance, has for long been a mascot for groups that wish to terminate cultural diversity in society. Russia’s Vladimir Putin has fans who post videos of his motorcade, of his walks down corridors in slow motion, and of his bare-chested horse rides. But these fans are a small fringe compared to the numbers, spread and diversity of the fans of humanitarian figures.

There are powerful reasons why there is no such thing as the global right. Any wound that is global will automatically become a left movement.

Even a strand of the Indian freedom movement that was led by the first generation of Hindu nationalists who did not seem to believe in ideas like non-violence, found support in Britain only from the left, including the early feminist movement which saw in the plight of Indians the plight of all British women. On the other hand, it was natural for British nationalists to despise Indian freedom fighters. This principle operates today in every right-wing struggle.

Nationalists of a society tend to perceive other nationalists as foes. And nationalists themselves often become liberals once they migrate—as is the case with many Indian patriots who live in the US.

Also, everyone, including nationalists, has a quota of compassion that they need to display. And it is easy for them to show compassion to victims outside their borders. For instance, it is easy for Trump supporters to sympathize with Kashmiris. It is easy empathy, very sweet, and does not affect their own lives.

When the stakes are low, everyone is a leftist.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’.





What Joker should learn from real-life supervillains


2019-10-13

Sometimes we can see the precise moment when an exquisite story collapses into ordinariness. In The Vegetarian, a novel by the South Korean writer Han Kang, a woman stops eating meat. This might seem unremarkable for Indians, but as the woman is located in Seoul, where eating meat is so sensible that it borders on sanity, her decision shakes the foundations of her life. Bonds break. Her family does what families are very good at—punishing. As her world falls apart, she is resolute in her decision, and she calmly watches her own destruction. This is what makes the novel exquisite; the reaction of people to a woman’s simple decision. But then, late in the novel, she begins to imagine she is a tree. This reveals her as an insane lady and here is where the novel falters and it releases us forever from its power.

The madness of the sane is powerful; the madness of the mad is merely a freak show.

I believe that writers who have great material on the insane should not ruin it by being too earnest and plainly presenting the protagonist as insane. Instead, the hero should be presented as “normal” with an abnormal trait. If a writer describes the mental condition of a character too much, he or she will deny the reader an opportunity to play his or her most important and underrated role in literature—to misunderstand.

Through misunderstanding, a reader makes convenient political and emotional assumptions, and in that way, deeply “identifies” with the character.

Misunderstanding is highly influential in the real world too. Across centuries, the insane have created revolutions because people did not know them to be insane, or did not wish to know the facts.

Misunderstanding is a good conductor of ideas, and of the fables of not only heroes, but also of villains. This is why Joker, which is a fantasy of darkness like all superhero films these days, fails in its ambition to be an exquisite film. It explains too much. We are told, in many ways, that its protagonist is mentally ill. A man whom we could have otherwise misunderstood as the Che of our times prances along as a freak. Director Todd Phillips appears to have learnt nothing from a way of the modern world: a Muslim who goes on a shooting spree is a “terrorist”, a powerful story that even defines global politics to an extent; but a White man who does the same, in fact more frequently, is merely a nut, which is a dull story.

The hero of Joker is a no-talent comedian who could have made up for his limitations by becoming a conscientious leftist comedian. Instead, he begins to express his rage at his own failures and calls for total anarchy. He becomes a leftist who is not a comedian. Other losers then make him their leader because, in an unfair system, order is surrender to injustice, and anarchy is hope. Unlike us, the masses in the film do not know of Joker’s madness. So they think he is a revolutionary, a visionary, a super activist. A sad clown thus becomes a hero. In that regard, Joker has some parallels with the real world, a world whose revolutionary heroes are in reality evil, celebrated by a clueless pall of unhappy people.

Joker lives in Gotham, a fictional adaptation of New York (I will never understand why New York needs a fictional adaptation). His apartment is small and bleak, and to emphasize that he is a “loser”, he is shown to live with his mother, an emphasis many Indian men may not comprehend.

By the standards of Mumbai, Joker’s flat is a commodious upper-middle-class dwelling for a family of just two. In every respect, the people of Mumbai may say Joker has a very good life.

That is the triumph of American capitalism—it is hard for its storytellers to show a poor urban White in a setting that most of the world would recognize as poverty. I wonder, though, why Phillips did not want to locate Joker as a homeless clown in a subway station. It would have been fascinating to follow the life of a sane but flawed clown who begs for a living in New York, who then wages a war on the city. Instead, we have a man who lives better than most people in the world calling to arms a fortunate affluent city, and a fellowship of privileged losers responding.

Seen in that context, most of the world might see the point in a statement made by a billionaire in the film: “Those of us who have made something of our lives will always look at those who haven’t, and see nothing but clowns.”

The most comical aspect of Joker is accidental: in Gotham, no African-American man is ever a part of a crime. It is always Caucasians. It is as though the film is terrified of real-life vigilantes who will accuse it of racism. This is surprising cowardice for its creator Todd Phillips, who wrote the brilliant comedy Borat, which disrespected everything that mainstream society holds sacred, and wrote and directed The Hangover comedy trilogy.

Phillips has been rewarded, however, for his Joker. Even before its release, the film was guaranteed success by a network of festival-critics and cinema entrepreneurs who loved it or hated or, who saw in it “metaphors” and “commentary” and “incels”.

Perhaps the biggest favour they did the film was to misunderstand it. They appear to have misunderstood its farce for anthropology. I hope one day Todd Phillips will reveal that the film was a prank—on serious people who see serious things in Marvel and DC Comics merchandise.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss laila, Armed and Dangerous’





What an ideal fellowship of bald men could teach us


2019-10-20

As some men know, a consequence of losing hair is gaining face. They might be among the 500 men who have formed a new fellowship called the All-Kerala Bald-Headed People’s Association. According to a news report, the idea of the club came from a film actor, who soon quit and remains anonymous. He was probably unwilling to be exposed as a bald man, which disqualifies him in any case because the objective of the association is to somehow “flaunt” baldness and end its shame.

The spirit of the club is admirable to all self-assured bald and balding men, but its language is suspiciously influenced by the organized lament industry. A foreboding of the club’s future uselessness is in one of its slogans: “Bald is beautiful”. As it is, most alliterations are daft, but calling bald “beautiful” is far worse than daft—an admission of defeat. When you plan a rebellion against the order of things, you should not profess to be a part of the order. That’s surrender, not uprising. What the oppressor controls should not be dear to the rebel. So, what the baldies should be telling the world is: “Beauty is not all there is to life.” Instead, the association is framing the world of bald men like how the left frames the world in general—as a place teeming with villains and their victims who need the comfort of nonsensical compliments.

The fact is that if tomorrow there is a real solution to baldness that is not very expensive and has no side-effects, all bald men will “cure” themselves. Handsome bald men will become handsome men with hair; and unattractive bald men will become unattractive men with hair. All bald-men’s clubs in the world will cease to exist. As baldness concerns men, mostly, the condition is not so sacred yet, unlike other forms of victimhood. Therefore, we can still state truths about it plainly, and we can see the idiocy of empathetic slogans like “bald is beautiful”.

The fellowship of bald men has more meaning than the farcical bonds many communities share. Bald men are a creation of a small set of mysterious genes, whose purpose is not known. Natural selection would have abolished baldness and denied millions of bald men the lottery of life if only, during our primitive ages, baldness had occurred in early adolescence rather than later. Bald men are the proof that not every mutation needs to have a reason that should favour man. Things happen for no reason. Evolution is not progress; evolution is merely change. That is the meaning of bald men.

Seen this way, a bald man has more intelligent reasons to cheer the success of other bald men than Indians have in celebrating the success of remote foreigners of “Indian origin”. A few days ago, when Abhijit Banerjee won the economics Nobel Prize, the pride of the alumni of Jawaharlal Nehru University for the triumph of one of its own, and of the citizens of Kolkata for the man who once lived there, and of many Bengalis across the world, reminded me of a poem by G.K. Chesterton in which a donkey that is carrying Jesus Christ thinks huge crowds have come to worship it. Bald men of the world have a greater claim to be a single clan thanmany Indian groups.

Larry David, bald man and the co-creator of Seinfeld, captured the fellowship of baldness very often in his other show, the exquisite Curb Your Enthusiasm. Once, after a girl abuses him as a “bald a**hole”, he tells police officers, “That’s a hate crime. We consider ourselves to be a group.” When the officer tells him, “I’m bald and I’m not offended,” David says: “With all due respect, officer Berg, you are not bald. You’ve chosen to shave your hair and that’s a look you’re cultivating in order to look fashionable, but we don’t really consider you part of the bald community…”

People often misunderstand humour as caricature. It is, at times, but often the evidence that a hypothesis is true is in a measure of how funny the hypothesis is.

The very features that make David argue, somewhat convincingly, lends baldness a degree of seriousness. Millions of bald men do go through their lives looking like the “before” picture in hair-transplant ads, which show a dejected bald man transforming into a happy man with a mop of hair. Many bald men who are unattractive or innately unsure of themselves blame their baldness just like the depressed mistake heads of state as the cause of their melancholy.

In Gabriel García Márquez’s Love In The Time Of Cholera, a balding man searches for a cure for years: “He memorized the agricultural information in the Bristol Almanac because he had heard that there was a direct relationship between the growth of hair and the harvesting cycles. He left the totally bald barber he had used all his life for a foreign newcomer who cut hair only when the moon was in the first quarter.”

In spirit, this is not very different from the quest of modern bald men. To liberate such men, Kerala’s “bald-headed people’s association” plans to groan about self-respect and make bald men run marathons. Instead, they should consider taking an element from capitalistic self-interest and joyous decadence. They should create a club that uses baldness only as a norm for entry; nothing else about the fellowship should be about the condition. They should become a network of influential bald men who put together extraordinary and entertaining events; they should get special deals on every material service for the bald.

To make people happy, there needs to be no lament.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’.





The world is not as depressing as doomsayers believe


2019-10-29

Diwali used to be a day when Indians bombed India, tearing ear drums, stunning the old whose limbs vibrated in the explosions, terrifying animals, and filling the air with lethal fumes. But across the nation, Diwali is becoming quieter and more joyful. Who would have thought that a set of regulations would subdue a Hindu subculture even as nationalists were ascending? If Indians can silence Diwali, they can do anything.

But this story is never told with any enthusiasm. Its joy appears farfetched. It is a doomed story that cannot travel far. What is an easier story to tell, and more rewarding for its narrators, is that India is in a crisis, and that its doom is coming soon. Across the world, stories of gloom are more influential than happy stories.

As a result, many people are disenchanted with the modern world. They think it has gone insane. Intellectuals are signing petitions lamenting some evil every month. Celebrities, whom the world has rewarded in fantastic ways, too, believe the world is in a crisis.

Even jerks are upset with the world (they too have feelings, it seems). The kind of people who had never read the front page of a newspaper until very recently are now articulate political analysts on a par with ageing men on morning walks. People who you thought were amiable, and normal (because they had two children, which makes many people appear so) have turned out to be raging lunatics on Twitter. Conscientious girls upon discovering politics are shocked that their sweet papas are right-wingers. And, so many people now know so much that there is a spike in the use of rebukes like, “correlation is not causation” and the “Dunning–Kruger effect”.

All American superhero movies have become a comment on “our dark times”. Liberal newspapers in the US are filled with the prognosis that America is coming to an end. A few days ago, Bruce Springsteen tweeted: “We’re living in a frightening time… Unfortunately we have somebody who I feel doesn’t have a grasp of the deep meaning of what it means to be an American.” He is among the many superstars who have a sense of doom.

But the fact is the world is not such a pathetic place. Poverty is receding, children are healthier. People still want to be good, and they are in the pursuit of happiness, which they find. The arcs of human lives still tend towards love and fairness, and the world still turns on our most important idea—that the fortunate should take care of the less fortunate.

That the world has changed drastically, and that its sanity has altered, is a myth created by a small set of people.

At the heart of this perception is a corrupt property of storytelling: Happiness is uniform and banal, while every misery is unique, hence, interesting and transmittable. This quality has always influenced storytelling. It is one reason why most stories have a happy ending: Once a story attains happiness, there is nothing interesting for a writer to say.

Also, certain professions have for long had an outsized role in telling the stories of our times. And they are by nature negative. Journalism, for instance, is enslaved by news, and in a happy world, what is tragic or gloomy is often news.

Other forms of storytelling, such as literature and activism, are refuges for the melancholic and the clinically depressed, who thrive on negativity. Literature at least permits some exuberant talent that can create islands of joy and humour. But activism, which is a parasitic story that takes over literary and journalistic narratives of a society, is entirely a network of breast-beaters who tell powerful, gloomy half-truths of their times.

It is true that today scientists, doctors, engineers and billionaires are gaining voice, and they are able to tell their stories by bypassing what the humanities and activism control. But the transmission of their stories, too, is influenced by the force of negativity. Some of them do use another powerful transmitter of stories—hope. Hope has qualities of a certain mystical happiness, but then doesn’t gloom often masquerade as hope? Hope is gloom dressed up to see the doctor.

Optimism is an entirely different quality, which is often confused with hope. Optimism radiates from happiness, which the disenchanted storytellers of our age try to kill through their celebration of gloom.

The bleak see a bleak world, and political gloom radiates from them. It hits an outer ring of receivers who are susceptible to melancholy, who then transmit it to greater circles of people who start to believe that the world is in a crisis.

It is true that in some areas, the world has truly turned more bitter.

The divide in society is for real. But, as this column argued earlier, “polarization” is a sign that one class of people does not have a monopoly anymore over mainstream ideas. So, what bothers most suave storytellers is in reality a good omen.

B.R. Ambedkar once framed the moral legitimacy of polarization when he told “low castes”: “It is your claim to equality which hurts them…If you continue to accept your lowly status ungrudgingly…they will allow you to live in peace.”

In the coming years, the radiation of gloom will only intensify as the world entertains itself through fables of rage and gloom. But people will always be innately happy. In this world, it is hard to escape happiness.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





All governments are at war with their own people


2019-11-03

As the identities of Indian activists who may have been spied upon by a shadowy agency slowly emerge, the matter has become the human rights industry’s equivalent of the Bachchan Diwali party: If you are on the list, your friends will think you have arrived big time, but then it is not clear why some A-listers are not on the list.

Facebook, which owns WhatsApp, has sued an Israeli company, called NSO Group, for selling a highly sophisticated spyware system, called Pegasus, to government agencies across the world that have, in turn, used it to breach phones of over a thousand people, including Indians. The malware lured the target to click on a link, which is typical of such attempts to break in, but it was also so advanced that it could gain access by sending a WhatsApp call even if it was not answered. The spyware could then collect all data from the device, including passwords, and control camera and audio settings.

All this is what we know, which means it is a fraction of what has transpired.

Some Indian activists have claimed that they were among the targets of Pegasus. At the time of filing this column, the Indian media have identified 17 targets and described them as “human rights activists, scholars and journalists”, which are ambiguous terms today, but descriptive of a type of people who are politicians but do not contest elections. Almost all of them fight the Indian government on behalf of the unfortunate.

The NSO Group has defended its spyware by saying that it has sold Pegasus only to “legitimate” government agencies. This statement appears to have implicated the Indian government in some way. Which other government, humanitarians ask, would be so interested in Indian activists?

As though in anticipation of this very moment, India has in place a minister who oversees law, justice, communications, electronics and information technology—Ravi Shankar Prasad, who has denied the accusation of government-grade spying with the observation: “…India is committed to protecting privacy of all Indian citizens.”

Governments usually do not deny that they snoop on their own people. They, in fact, claim that they do it legally. But then, many things that the government does are legal precisely because it’s the government that’s doing it, unless some people have been clumsy with the paperwork. The most famous incorrect statement in history has to be Hegel’s: “The State is the actuality of the ethical idea.” The State is, in fact, actually the fabricator of the ethical idea.

Every government claims that it spies on its own people for the ultimate moral reason: to protect them. Even Obama defended large-scale and sophisticated snooping on Americans when he was US president. He also said his people would have been better off if they had not come to know about the spying.

Activists ask if the Indian government is in a state of war against its citizens. It’s meant to be a rhetorical question, a familiar rebuke. But it has an answer, and that is “yes”. All governments are at war with their people. This holds even in nations where they get to vote.

The State needs the money of its people, their surrender to laws and their acceptance of a limited set of freedoms, widely overrated as “liberty”. And, the State needs to know, in the most efficient ways possible, what is going on. Also, the State is in a perpetual war against disenchanted groups that do not have the funds to contest elections, so conduct a soft war through humanitarianism, environmentalism, and other ambushes that masquerade as journalism. The typical government is filled with successful people, who need to know what their vanquished rivals were plotting.

As technology advances, governments become increasingly sophisticated snoopers. They officially snoop at many levels.

Over a decade ago, when a chain of mysterious sources handed over a set of recordings of phone conversations of a woman called Niira Radia to the media, no one knew which wing of the government had made the recordings. Only after some of the recordings were made public did we know that they were conducted by the finance ministry after an “anonymous” letter (which the ministry, mysteriously, took very seriously) drew its attention to Radia.

It is possible that even at the level of domestic crimes, the police do not solve tough cases only by going to shamans, as some of them are known to do. A more efficient way is the illegal tapping of phones to collect information that can never be presented as evidence in court, but points to the truth, which the investigators then reverse-engineer to arrive at evidence.

The NSO Group, too, claims that it is essentially in a moral business, that it helps governments disarm terrorists and drug cartels. In fact, NSO has a human rights policy, which is chiefly a nonsensical statement that includes words like “guiding principles” and how it does not sell to governments with a bad human rights record (yet it sold Pegasus to Saudi Arabia). It is inevitable that journalists will have two interesting questions for the organization: “Did you sell your tech to India” and “If so, when?”

The activists whose phones the spyware breached also seem to be the type of people who fear Aadhaar, which is in comparison an innocuous assembly of already surrendered information. I cannot help thinking that the activists may have berated Aadhaar on their phones to their like-minded friends, and how much the snoop who heard this would have laughed.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





When a prison tells the modern history of a country


2019-11-11

One summer day in 1981, Sunil Gupta went to Tihar Jail to start work as assistant superintendent. He had an offer letter, but the superintendent told him there was no vacancy anymore. He had quit a secure job with the Indian Railways for this. Dazed, he waited outside the superintendent’s room wondering what he must do. A suave man appeared and asked him: “Yes, what brings you here?” Gupta explained his situation, after which the well-dressed man went into the superintendent’s office and in an hour returned with a typed appointment letter. The suave man was Charles Sobhraj, who was serving a prison term in Tihar Jail for several murders and other offences.

The extraordinary power of a famous convict to appoint his own jailor is among the stories Gupta narrates in his memoir Black Warrant, which he has co-written with journalist Sunetra Choudhury. Gupta, who according to Sobhraj was the only officer in Tihar Jail he could not bribe, recounts his career as a jailor that spanned 35 years, or “two and a half life-sentences”, and in that way portrays an absurd, hilarious, terrifying and heart-breaking history of modern India, as would be the case when a prison and a prisoner tell the story of their nation.

Gupta was taught how to read a warrant, how to scan court notices and many other legalities of his job by two men who were serving time for murder and who made an income by making the warrants of other prisoners disappear. Gupta was also impressed by a convict who had, as a free man, walked into a police station posing as a deputy commissioner of police and demanded his own case file, with which he vanished.

From the moment he joined Tihar, Gupta saw very closely a vast India that existed in another dimension. Pregnant inmates of the prison did not wish to leave because they believed that a woman in captivity was likely to deliver a boy, just as Lord Krishna was born in prison. Also, jail food was, and still is, considered so auspicious that some of the most affluent families, who are not imprisoned, but miserable nevertheless, ordered Tihar’s terrible meals for good luck.

Gupta, who retired from service about three years ago, has overseen several hangings, including those of Billa and Ranga, who were executed in 1982 after being sentenced to death in a kidnap and murder case. Two hours after Ranga was hanged, he still had a pulse, possibly because he had held his breath. So a policeman jumped into the pit and pulled Ranga’s legs to squeeze the last breath out. Gupta also knew of a hangman who, after every hanging, poured liquor on the planks of the gallows as an offering to the ghost of the dead man.

The hanging of Afzal Guru in 2013 was the last Gupta witnessed. Guru was sentenced to death for his role in the terrorist attack of 13 December 2001 on Parliament, a role that he claimed was minor. He was told of his impending death two hours before the hanging. Gupta was present when Guru was informed by a superintendent, “with regret I have to tell you that today is your hanging”.

Guru said, “I know, I figured.”

Gupta then sat with Guru to have tea. Guru started singing a song from the film Badal (Cloud): Apney liye jiyein toh kya jiyein, tu ji ae dil zamaane ke liye (What is life worth if lived for oneself, live for the world, O’ my heart). Gupta began to sing along until Guru stopped to ask for tea. But the man who served tea was not around, and Guru’s final request went unfulfilled.

Actually, Guru did make another request. Before he walked to the gallows, he told the superintendent: “I see compassion in your eyes. Will you be there at the time of hanging? …Make sure I am not in pain.”

Gupta, a man who has the courage to admit that hangings once filled him with excitement and who articulates the finest details of death, does not recount what followed Guru’s request to be spared pain, which holds in its silence an eerie sadness.

Many years before that, in 1984, Gupta was in the thick of things during the hanging of another Kashmiri, Maqbool Butt. A few days after his hanging, a court in Delhi prepared to hear a scheduled hearing of Butt’s case, and the judge was then formally informed that the State had already killed him.

As India wished to contain the emotions in Butt’s home state following his death, his body was not handed over to his family. He was buried inside Tihar. As a result, many inmates began to see his ghost. One man, who assaulted his cell mate, said that Butt’s ghost did it. Some of the most feared criminals begged not to be lodged near his grave. Gupta himself avoided that stretch.

Among the most dramatic claims Gupta makes is about one of the accused in the assault on a paramedical student in a moving bus, an event that shocked and transfixed the nation in late 2012. Ram Singh was found hanging in his cell in Tihar. The jail said it was suicide, but Gupta believes he was murdered. The cell with a ceiling 12 feet high, and bare, is an impossible place for a man to kill himself, at least without assistance. But the society did not believe it was worth its time to probe the suspicious death of such a man.

Tihar is India when no one is looking. Other prisons are even worse. There is accidental design in this. India compensates for its limitations in law enforcement and judicial processes through its terrifying jails. And the absence of human rights in prisons contributes to the safety of all. As always, what India lacks in order, it makes up through disorder.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Are the intellectual benefits of reading overrated?


2019-11-17

A few days ago, a girl rose from a large audience and asked Shashi Tharoor to give “a new word for us to learn”, as he was “a man of vocabulary”. Tharoor, as he sipped elegantly from a tea cup, said: “I will give you a very simple and old word—‘read’.” Even though he mentioned reading as a way of improving one’s vocabulary, no one was left in any doubt that he was emphasizing one of our most sacred beliefs—that reading makes you intelligent, that the act of reading itself is a form of intelligence, and that reading is the most superior way to absorb knowledge. Through reading, he “developed the kind of mind that God has now blessed me with… so my only advice to all of you is read, read, read…” There was applause. Ordinary people rewarded his message through their greatest tribute—it went “viral”.

His is not only a common view, but has the finality of a settled, common truth. As a result, a vast number of people live in private shame. They are not readers. They find books boring. They may read out of professional or academic compulsion and, on occasion, they may read an article that might be useful, which has “a takeaway”, but generally they cannot bear to read long articles; they will struggle to reach the end of this short column, even though I am trying to trick them right now into believing it is all about them.

There are others who are actually interested in reading, but they cannot focus; their minds are too active for the stillness that reading requires.

Among the vast millions of non-readers are highly successful people—industrialists, and CEOs and surgeons and techies and actors and even directors. Actually, even writers. One of the great secrets of our age is that most educated people in the world do not wish to read or cannot read well. Many of them are intelligent, just as many well-read people are not very intelligent.

Reading appears to have the qualities of an ability and, in this light, a vast number of people in the world might have a reading disability. On occasion, I see non-readers, long oppressed by ceaseless tributes to reading, cursing the state of affairs and declaring that reading is not everything, that there are other valuable forms of acquiring knowledge. But generally, people do not have the courage to say this because they fear they will be perceived by others as not only uninformed, but also unintelligent. Most of them, even though they do not enjoy reading, force themselves to read a book as a form of self-improvement. You can see them in public spaces, peering into a book for a few seconds, then looking up at the slightest distraction. You can see them on a flight almost never turning a page; their minds have wandered away to more beautiful places.

Actually, even readers of one genre demonstrate a reading disability when faced with books from other genres. Men who enjoy thousands of pages of dense military history lose their ascetic powers of concentration when they are forced (by love) to read a literary novel. People who enjoy Jane Austen may read a popular history of calculus exactly at the speed, and the level of comprehension and retention, of a semi-literate.

Even within the area of a reader’s interest, he might find it hard to focus.

The literary deity, Gabriel García Márquez, struggled for several years to read a celebrated novel whose first five pages generations of readers have struggled to get past —Ulysses by James Joyce. But, like many of us, García Márquez thought something was wrong with him and not the book. Later, “as a docile adult”, he managed to complete the book. “Docile” is an important expression. The young who are gifted with good minds may not have the docility to read. All through my early youth, the best-read boys were terrible writers; they still are. They filled their vacant heads with the works of other people because their own minds produced nothing.

Beneficiaries of reading, like writers, and people who are good sponges of the intelligence of others, are unsurprisingly the evangelists of reading. But what every seasoned reader knows is that a good book is rare to come by. In that way, a book is no more sacred than other human creations.

Kindle’s indicators of mass reader-behaviour point to the fact that most celebrated books are abandoned very early—like A Brief History Of Time by Stephen Hawking, and Capital In The Twenty-First Century by Thomas Piketty. And that list of “transformative” books you posted on social media is mostly a lie.

Books might be over-venerated, but is it the same as saying that reading is overrated? Is reading a “good” book superior to watching a good film or a good documentary? There is a widespread notion that reading results in a deeper retention of what is absorbed. But there is no evidence to support this view. From what I have seen, retention itself is an ability. People who retain a lot from reading also demonstrate higher levels of retention from watching a documentary or a film. And many good readers retain very little of what they have read, just as they retain very little of what they watch.

Some people absorb knowledge better from sounds and visuals; and others better from calm reading. The exalted place of reading can be traced to the fact that it is the oldest technique of accumulating vast amounts of information, and to the fact that writers, who have an outsized influence on the world, have promoted a wish as a truth.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





From a former poor student to present poor students


2019-11-24

By the time I entered high school, my family had slipped from lower middle class to absurdly poor. I was poor in the sense that even Medha Patkar would have called me that. At 16, when I entered college, I was malnourished and in clothes that will embarrass Kanhaiya Kumar. (I was a year younger for my batch due to a clerical oversight and not precocity.) I wished to become a writer, but I was not stupid enough to think a literature course will help. I chose literature for a dishonourable reason.

The administration of Loyola College was confused because my highest marks in the board exams were in math and computer science, yet I wanted to enter a stream that had by then become a refuge for boys with learning disabilities. I could not tell the college that my reason was that I would have to work part-time to feed myself and pay the fees too, probably, and I could wing my way to a literature degree, a feat I was not confident of pulling off in math. Eventually, I did get by without ever seriously studying Chaucer or Shakespeare, about whom I wrote many impressive essays in exams. Now and then, I sold Primus Kabsons stoves and Eureka Forbes products in showrooms, and Funskool toys door-to-door, and milked college festivals for speaking and writing cash prizes. I did not attend my convocation because I did not consider it worth the hard-earned ₹200 I had to pay to attend.

There were thousands like me who were harmed by the religion of higher education. I should not have been forced to pursue a piece of laminated paper. At 16, I should have been free to work for a newspaper or a film company, instead of wasting three years listening to rustic professors who could barely speak English trying to teach me the greatness of some simpleton British writers who would have been in unmarked graves if their country’s brutal merchants had not colonized the world.

Oh yes, education is about acquiring knowledge. I will inevitably come to that.

I have followed, with my rightful amusement, the ongoing protests of students against a fee hike in Delhi’s Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU). Most of them, I know from experience, spend thousands of rupees on various fees not to gain knowledge, but to collect a degree or to escape the tough world outside their campus. In essence, their fight against the government is to pay half the ransom and not the whole ransom. They should instead be fighting to pay nothing at all. What they should be fighting for is the abolition of farcical higher education.

The most humane reform modern India can make is to ensure that a college degree is not a qualification for non-technical or non-scientific jobs, or even for any aptitude test, including the civil services exam.

A written test and a series of job interviews are not a perfect assessment of a human, but still a far superior form of ascertaining a person’s abilities than a piece of paper about him. In fact, for jobs that do not require preloaded technical knowledge, it should be made illegal for corporations and other organizations to demand a college degree, as this is a form of economic and social discrimination.

Politicians and other luminaries who have emerged from poverty should, instead of fabricating degree certificates, campaign to end the farce. This will liberate millions of youth; suddenly the formal job market in the private and public sectors will be open to a class of Indians who are innately smart but did not buy membership to a club that is controlled by the elite.

A few years ago, Japan contemplated ending humanities courses altogether. I don’t believe India should ever do that. If we set aside the farce of degrees, there is great value in a formal arts and philosophy education. My complaint is only against the veneration of higher education.

As part of the JNU protests, a group of Dalit students claimed that higher education is their revolution against “Brahmin hegemony”. They were humanities students, and they were wrong. Their higher education is, in fact, their co-option by “Brahmin hegemony”. All revolutions against the elite that involve imitating the elite fail. You don’t fight Brahmins by glorifying what they have created; rather by destroying it. As a literature student, what I learned is that half of humanities is a veneration of a wrong analysis of the world by rich Caucasian men and the mentally off-kilter.

Also, the poor are conned by prestige. The nature of prestige is such that it ceases to exist when the poor demonstrate that they can achieve it. That is why the refined affluent who express their concern for the poor students of JNU do not send their own children there. Instead, they will buy them an unsurpassable education in the US. Shouldn’t everyone who believes in equality deny their own children a huge head start?

There is a moment in the TV series, Silicon Valley, when a character loosely based on the venture capitalist Peter Thiel is giving a talk.

Tech VC: College has become a cruel expensive joke on the poor and the middle class that benefits only the perpetrators of it.

Ex-Hippie in the audience: You are a dangerous man, spewing ignorance.

VC: I’m just saying people should trust themselves more than a system that happily churns out unemployed debtors and provides dubious value.

Hippie: The true value of a college education is intangible.

VC: The true value of snake-oil is intangible as well.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Why Godse is condemned and Savarkar hailed a hero


2019-12-01

A few days ago the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) member of Parliament Pragya Singh Thakur hailed Mahatma Gandhi’s assassin as a “patriot”. She said it in Parliament, whose elected member she is. Most people present in the House seemed upset, and her own party condemned her mildly. This is not the first time she has publicly praised Nathuram Godse. When she did so a few months ago, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said he would never “fully forgive her”.

Yet, many in the BJP claim to adore Vinayak Damodar Savarkar, a man who was accused in court as the mastermind of a plot to kill Gandhi that was carried out by Godse.

Godse was hanged; Savarkar was arrested but eventually acquitted for lack of evidence, a reason why so many nationalists say it is not wrong to officially rehabilitate and honour him. What they seem to be saying is: a) We adore Gandhi, b) His murder was a great crime, c) His assassin Godse’s alleged mentor Savarkar was innocent.

However, considering the circumstantial evidence against Savarkar and how modern Indian courts have reacted to this type of evidence, it is unlikely he would have been freed if he were tried today.

India hanged Afzal Guru in 2013 on the basis of less than what the prosecution apparently had on Savarkar in 1948. Vallabhbhai Patel, a hero for nationalists, now memorialized as the world’s tallest statue, grumbled that the technicalities of the judicial process may have acquitted Savarkar, but “morally” he was a murderer.

It is absurd that any party should condemn Godse and venerate Savarkar. Yet, there are reasons why it happens.

But first let us look at the case against Savarkar. Nine people were accused in the assassination. Two were hanged, five were given life imprisonment, one turned approver, who portrayed one of the accused as the plot’s mastermind. The only one who was acquitted was this alleged “mastermind”—Savarkar.

Godse and Narayan Apte, who were hanged for the murder, were disciples of Savarkar, the formulator of modern Hindutva, a man who argued that India belonged to Hindus, and that Gandhi’s empowerment and appeasement of Muslims was despicable.

The accused who had turned approver, Digambar Badge, said that he, along with Godse and Apte, went to Savarkar’s residence in Mumbai on 14 January 1948, 16 days before the assassination. Godse and Apte then asked Badge to wait outside, and they went in with a bag that contained some weapons. They emerged after about 10 minutes with the bag. Three days later, they met at the residence again, according to Badge. This time he was asked to wait on the ground floor inside the house, while Godse and Apte went in to meet Savarkar. “When Godse and Apte were on their way downstairs along with Savarkar, [Badge] heard Savarkar telling them…[in Marathi]… ‘come back with success’,” writes Vaibhav Purandare in his biography of Savarkar that was released this year.

Savarkar denied all this. But there is a very interesting eyewitness that Purandare mentions. On the 14th, Godse and Apte were travelling from Pune to Mumbai by the Deccan Express. A woman was walking up and down the compartment looking for a window seat. Apte offered his, and struck a conversation with her. She turned out to be an actor known as Bimba. Her brother was picking her up at the train station, and she offered to drop the men off in her brother’s car to their final destination—Savakar’s home in Dadar, her neighbourhood. She deposed in court that she had indeed dropped the men there.

This incident is fascinating for reasons that has nothing to do with politics: A woman travelling alone in a train, chatting with two men she had just met, contradicting notions that modern Indians have of their past; and two men who will commit one of the most famous assassinations in history just a fortnight from then letting a public figure drop them off at the residence of a possible accomplice or mentor or even a “‘mastermind”.

Pragya Thakur’s appreciation of Godse may not be a fringe opinion; it is a familiar view among many who form her party’s political base. For many Indians, though we can never know how many, Godse is an impressive figure, even though they do not despise Gandhi.

The long reign of Nehruvians and their intellectual franchises who controlled history, journalism and an industry called acclaim, has ensured that the Hindu movement does not have many proper heroes. And it is not easy even for the BJP to magnify men of the past.

It was perhaps this scarcity that made the party turn to a Congress hero, Patel. So the BJP cannot squander Savarkar’s judicial acquittal and let go of him as a figure.

The party sees in him what is central to all nationalistic organizations across the world —relevance. I do not accept the view that Gandhi is losing his relevance to India. The story he told, of love and peace, is at the very heart of arts and religion itself, and it can never be irrelevant. But many modern Indians see Savarkar as relevant, too. That may be why the BJP hails Savarkar as a hero.

In any case, let us not forget that Savarkar received that strange, but immensely useful abstract object only Indians understand— the clean chit.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





There is proof that Nithyananda’s Kailaasa does exist


2019-12-08

About three years ago, a man who was once a techie proposed a startup idea to a large audience: Indians who had insights into the afterlife should approach billionaires, “like Bill Gates”, and ask them to put billions in a trust for safekeeping that Indians would then return in the next birth of the depositors, “when we find you”. There was applause. On stage with the man was the chief dignitary of the event, Nithyananda, who was then, as he is today, considered a spiritual being by thousands of Indians. He nodded with a slow blink, exactly what Tamilians do when they want to express calm, honest certainty about something they are not certain about. “If we do a bit more research and establish the authority,” he said, “it is possible.” They were serious, these are very serious men.

Usually, Nithyananda does not share a stage; he says such things sitting on a throne, alone. Once he said that he was developing “a software” that can make animals talk. He even said, “Yesterday, I casually tested the software, it was perfectly working.”

Like several spiritual gurus, Nithyananda faces rape charges. It appears that he has fled India. A few days ago, he declared the birth of a new nation called Kailaasa for pure Hindus who will follow “agamic” traditions. By “agamic”, he was referring to its Sanskrit meaning, “that which has come down”, and not the English meaning, which means “asexual”. He said he was now spiritually ready “to initiate people into levitation”.

He makes many Indians laugh. The role of Nithyananda, like some entertainers, is to make you feel you are better.

But the truth is that his Kailaasa exists. Not merely in Ecuadorian territory, as some claim, but in more familiar places. Like here in India. Everything he said Kailaasa will be already exists as an Indian reality in some form or another.

The simplest level of Kailaasa is its politics. Every persecuted Hindu who wants to practise Hinduism will be admitted into Kailaasa. This, coincidentally, resembles a strand from a piece of legislation the Indian government expects to pass that will grant citizenship to Hindus (among others) who have fled other countries. If you follow the undercurrent of Nithyananda’s declaration, Kailaasa is actually a refuge for Hindus who feel victimized in and by India. This powerful notion of victimhood among Hindus in the country is not new.

For years, activists milked the monopoly that minorities had over this rich political resource that victimhood is. Now, across the world, the socially dominant, which include racial majorities and men, have adopted the techniques of the weak.

In Nithyananda’s Kailaasa, as envisioned by him, there will be an awakening of “the third eye”, an awakening of the “kundalini”, which is a reality or a rumour depending on your personality type. It could be an “inner awakening”of the solitary kind, or the reward for participating in “satsangs”, which are devotional gatherings and thus a collective exercise. All these awakenings can be pursued in my 2 sq. km colony in Gurgaon, Haryana. I live in Kailaasa.

In the real world, madmen who are known as mad are not influential; madmen who are not known as mad are the only kind of people who are influential. And they believe that the others are delusional. And they often substantiate their arguments by invoking our most sacred religion, science. All this is common between our world and Kailaasa.

In fact, when a Tamilian says, “It can been scientifically proved”, he usually means something that he knows is true but cannot prove.

About two years ago, a retired cricketer of nationwide fame and acclaim told a few people in a room where I was present, “I can scientifically prove in 15 minutes that India is a Hindu country.”

Then the former cricketer said, “I can prove it in 5 minutes, actually.”

Upon some thought, he added, “Or at least you will not be able to scientifically disprove it.” This was in the authors’ lounge of a literature festival. It could have been held in Kailaasa.

Nithyananda’s central proposition is that ancient Hinduism had explained the meaning of life and why there is something instead of nothing, but the transmission of this explanation had been substandard in modern times until his arrival.

Nithyananda once said the “crooked non-vegetarian brain” came up with the equation “E=mc2”. He also said there was no difference between “energy” and “matter” (which strangely is what Albert Einstein too was trying to say in his famous equation).

Nithyananda challenges scientific conventions, but he does not disrespect the idea of science itself. In fact, he appears to venerate science. He conveys the abstract through scientific language, like most scholars in the real world do. He said his nation of Kailaasa would permit entry to life emerging from “all 11 dimensions”. How is this any more absurd than the most revered scientists today talking confidently about multi-dimensions?

If you think scientists have proof, beyond mathematical proof, you must read more. Theoretical physics is one deep Kailaasa.

A world where mystery is glorified, the paranormal is accepted, and everybody talks about meditation as though they know what it means, and “belief” is a virtue and not just another word for “delusion”, which it is.

Is this your residential colony or Kailaasa? Can you tell the difference?

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Why you don’t love immigrants as much as you claim


2019-12-15

In the end, the National Register of Citizens will identify illegal immigrants, and the newly-amended Citizenship Bill will naturalize some of them if they are not Muslims. Usually, societies that wish to discriminate against a religion take great pains to cloak it in respectable economic and humanitarian terms. The Indian government, however, appears to have taken great pains to present its reasonable economic and humanitarian intentions as religious bias.

India’s economic intent is to favour poor Indians over poor foreigners, and its humanitarian intent is to grant citizenship to those who have fled part-theocracies in the neighbourhood and are not so many that they will alter Indian politics or exert a strain on the nation’s resources. But India has articulated this in a way that appals many.

The reactions to India’s new policy on immigrants may have made you feel that many people here love immigrants. Some Hindus are behaving as though they are so full of insatiable love for each other that they now need to love “persecuted” Hindus from other lands. And India’s suave are demonstrating great love for Muslim immigrants whom they absorb as servants with no fair contracts, pay poorly for 12-hour shifts with no weekly offs, and sack them at five-minute notice.

Compassion for poor immigrants is a high virtue and emerges from mankind’s most intelligent invention—the idea that the strong should take care of the weak. But people who do not have to make any sacrifices in exchange for professing such compassion are not the finest analysts of the issue. This is the reason why The Guardian has repeatedly got its own nation wrong.

On Friday, as early results of the UK’s general elections showed a thumping victory for the Conservatives, who had championed Brexit, which is essentially an immigration issue, The Guardian reported that the poll results were a “shock” outcome. I think only The Guardian and its subscribers were shocked. Its intellectuals, whose jobs are unaffected by migration, have been telling others who are in more precarious positions that they have nothing to fear from immigrants. We don’t know yet who is right, but we know how most people feel.

Across the world, the poor and the lower middle classes despise poor migrants (for convenience I will use the word “migrants” to refer to “immigrants”, too) because poor migrants first compete for resources and jobs with poor residents and not with editorial writers and poverty economists. This is what politicians know.

A central attribute of migrants is that they are competition, or perceived as competition. If you are not in competition with a migrant, you are analysing the wrong one. Find the migrant who is your rival, and you will suddenly realize you are not so noble anymore.

Who is your migrant, your child’s migrant? The provincial students who are taking over the Indian Institutes of Technology and against whom the old urban elite cannot compete in entrance exams. Listen carefully to how the refined condemn the new elite engineering students—as merely exam-crackers, who have no other talent, who can’t speak English, who don’t read novels, who don’t quiz, or play Carnatic music. Have you gone back to your alma mater recently, and covertly found the new students there shockingly “downmarket”, and did you instead express your thoughts as noble concern for how “the standards have fallen”?

These are all sophisticated ways of putting down the migrant who is encroaching on your turf, your culture, your way of life and your resources and the resources of your children.

Also, the new type of politicians and scholars who have taken over Lutyens’ Delhi—they are the new spatial and cultural migrants. This is the very reason why conscientious economists and other humanities professors who claim to have compassion for migrants hate the new rustic, nationalistic and vernacular academics.

In news coverage of the amended citizenship bill, you may have seen images of protests in Assam. Many who have the heart but not the time to read news have been led to believe that Assam is filled with angry humanitarians who are demanding an influx of Muslims from other places. The fact is they are screaming that they do not want any immigrants.

Even a famous Assamese television anchor who usually agrees entirely with the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) in a daily coincidence, has said India’s new citizenship policy is “ridiculous”.

Most humans are wary of immigrants, and the BJP knows that. I believe that the party plans to build increasingly efficient ways to transfer cash and subsidies to the most needy of voters, and that it does not want illegal immigrants to share India’s modest resources. A significant section of the Indian electorate is wary of the Muslim population in India, a fear that often gets presented as a humanitarian concern for “explosive population growth”. This is a cloak that India chose not to use in its new citizenship policy. However, it has bluntly used faith in Islam as a criterion to deny immigrants citizenship. As a result, the optics are very bad.

All nations are discriminatory, but they deploy informal policies to carry out the discrimination. For instance, there is no written law that requires US immigration authorities to question Muslims more often and deeply than they do Christian Whites. Yet, they do.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Why it’s smart for the ruling party to tell another story


2019-12-22

Everybody has won. The ongoing public protests in several cities against a new immigration policy is a highly valuable advertisement of the idea that India’s ruling Bharatiya Janata Party is the only organization in the world that has the back of Hindus, and that it will reduce the competition on the streets for unskilled Hindus at the expense of Muslim immigrants. But Indians who are ashamed of the BJP, too, have won.

The poignant spectacle of their protests on the streets has conveyed to the world that ordinary Indians care for Muslims. Whether this is true is irrelevant to this paragraph. In global perception, India appears to be morally superior than the government it elected. Some people may even believe that Indians are pelting stones at buses out of love for Muslims.

Muslims, too, have won. They now know their fate is a lot better than that of large-denomination notes in 2016; it is not going to be easy for anyone to delegitimize any of them all of a sudden. “Students” won, too, as the word “students” has suddenly acquired a noble heft, as though they all do something very important, very sacred.

Indian politics, often unappreciated because it does not look as suave as in Western democracies, won as it demonstrated yet again how chaos, opportunism and melodrama force the powerful to articulate that India is primarily an ethical idea. Home minister Amit Shah, for instance, reached out to some journalists to explain that he has been misunderstood, and that the government is not trying to make India a “Hindu country”. He pointed out that the new amendment to the citizenship act will not take away the citizenship of any Indian; it will only grant citizenship to some immigrants—those who have fled three neighbouring nations, and who have been in India before 2014 and who are not Muslims.

The argument that Indian Muslims have nothing to fear seems flawed, though. India has not defined who exactly a citizen will be. We have a modified citizenship act that does not say which documents will conclusively prove citizenship. Why shouldn’t poor Muslims be worried? What if the new citizenship policy turns out to be yet another grand plan of this government that was “a good idea” but whose implementation was bad?

In recent interviews, Shah said the accession of Kashmir beyond any ambiguity and the National Register of Citizens in Assam, which the government plans to extend to the whole nation, were the promises of the morally feeble Congress party, which his more efficient and courageous party has converted into actuality. And he said his new citizenship policy was a Nehruvian ideal, especially the idea that India will be the natural home for all persecuted Hindus of the world. But when the BJP implements Congress ideas, he said, it suddenly becomes “communal”.

As a storyteller, which every political party is, there is something that the BJP has to come to terms with. As this column once argued: “In public perception, the Congress party has a monopoly over corruption in a way the BJP has a monopoly over communal injustice even though all significant political parties in India have been revealed as corrupt and communal. Charges of communal atrocities just don’t stick on the Congress for the same reasons that charges of corruption don’t stick on the BJP.” All stories that the BJP chooses to tell has to take this into account. Also, the fact that strong men often are poor storytellers.

The chief storytellers of the BJP are men who have reasons to venerate human strength and positivity, while all of literature is a lesson that what transmits a story is the element of human vulnerability. Shah has defended his new immigration policy with reason and logic, but he appears unconvincing to many because India often does not implement a policy with logic and reason, and so the immense human suffering that Muslims fear has much substance. Imagine a Muslim family torn apart, some of them put in detention centres because they do not have their papers?

There is a reasonable story, though, that the BJP can focus on, which is, that it wants to give it all to poor Indians instead of sharing it with poor foreigners, and for this reason has to dissuade poor immigrants from entering the nation. No one seriously condemns the BJP for this strand of the story, just that it cannot use Islam as a disqualifier. Other nations do discriminate, but they do it with cunning and sophistication. Often decency is the act of hiding indecency.

While the new immigration policy does favour the BJP in the short term, it contributes to a political idea that can harm the party over the next decade. Already, the political bloc against the BJP is not merely a chaotic assembly of regional parties and harmless academics, but of a powerful emotion. And the emotion is not something as innocuous as “secularism”, which the party rightly does not fear, but something more potent. Just like any Indian who is moving up the social ladder is a natural patron of the BJP, it has come to be that any Indian who feels he is going down, who feels insecure and threatened, or is melancholic for any reason is becoming a natural foe of the party.

The BJP should attempt to tell another story. Maybe it can start with the claim that India is home to all “persecuted” neighbours. It is, after all, easier to define “persecution” than “citizenship”. I stake my entire journalistic reputation when I say Pervez Musharraf will not apply for citizenship.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Use your flaws to become a better person next year


2019-12-29

Most people want to become better people. To this end, they listen to some people who tell them that they can become better by cultivating good habits: Touch your toes, read more, work hard, bend your back, shut your eyes and listen to your own breath and have no thoughts, including the thought that you are having no thoughts, eat less, quit grains, quit smoking, quit sugar, never have a meal alone.

Good habits, the world is always telling us, are only possible through good qualities. But what if you have no good qualities? And what if the most famous good qualities in the world are merely the qualities of the gurus. Aren’t all the gurus only saying, “Be like me”? And, what if some of the good qualities actually do not exist at all outside the farce of language. As this column once argued, “discipline” is the false public front for complex private procedures. And what if, for many other reasons, you cannot attain healthy habits?

To become a better person, should you become another person?

To venerate virtues that are external to us and suppress our innate flaws is to deny who we really are, and our true powers. (In fact, I think that some of evil itself might be the vestiges of a set of excellent qualities a child needed to survive childhood.)

In the new year, I propose that people try to achieve their goals not by trying to acquire good qualities they never had, but by exploiting their innate character flaws to do marvellous things.

Actually, people do use their flaws to attain their goals, just that they do not realize it or accept it. For instance, ambition, at its core, is a capacity for unhappiness. It is a ferocious current that can make a human body absorb considerable pain to attain a purely materialistic interest. This, of course, is the capitalist capacity for unhappiness. The leftist capacity for unhappiness is expressed as social service.

Much of successful activism is fuelled by many others flaws, too, like envy, a deep sense of failure, depression, delusion, charlatan male sexual tricks. And pure self-interest. There is self-interest that creates business, and self-interest of the elite that creates humanitarian unrest. Adam Smith erred in promoting “the invisible hand”; there are in reality two invisible hands—quite appropriately the left hand and the right hand.

Also, sexual greed in men is an underrated factor in the analysis of how men and women differ in their professional ambitions. Men know success can vastly increase the prospects of sex, and this drives them even when they think they are monogamous and loyal, and do not need many sexual partners. You don’t have to be married for ten years to realize that sex is chiefly a fantasy of sex.

So we do use our flaws, and even evil, to succeed, but there is something very dark about now knowing why we do what we do. To be ignorant of what has colonized our bodies is to be zombies. This is why we must secretly legitimize our great flaws and redirect them to become better.

The power of vanity: Some people have a great capacity for paying tributes to themselves. We can see evidence of modern vanity in the way people keep talking about themselves and the tireless articulation of their problems, what they are going through, what they are thinking and their overblown fears of the violation of their privacy. If people can accept they are vain, they will find the motivation to sculpt themselves into something they can truly be vain about. Vanity can make a slothful person wake up at dawn and run to the gym and make a non-reader read deeply. In fact, without vanity, without being closely acquainted with our own vanities, it is very difficult to perform some very healthy repetitive tasks.

Only the misanthrope has clarity: A good thing that has happened lately is that people have stopped pretending to be “objective”. When they used to ask you to “be objective”, what they really meant was “agree with me”.

These are confused people, but there do exist objective people. The objective are not an ideological-type; they are a personality-type. Objectivity emerges from a beautiful character flaw. The truly objective are people who are misanthropes and cannot be colonized by social order, contagious virtue and hyper-morality. As a result, they see what others cannot.

And, how to use addictions: Some people are more prone to addictions than others. Instead of abolishing addiction, I feel they should just change the substance. Their addictive personalities present them with a great advantage if they can move away from easy forms of releasing endorphins, like intoxicants and maida, to more difficult forms like hard exercise and solving puzzles. For instance, most long-distance runners who are honest runners—that is runners who enjoy running more than talking about running—can pursue the sport only because they are addicted to it. Addictive running can be physically destructive, of course, but still less harmful and more useful than most common forms of addiction.

In a similar state are people with obsessive compulsive disorders. Such disorders can be used effectively to pursue difficult goals. For instance, a person who has to turn a door knob seven times when he shuts the door, or has to check the previous page-number every time he turns a page in a book, can also allow more useful tics to develop, like reading a dense scientific journal for exactly 57 minutes every day, or pumping iron for 37 minutes.

I wish you well in the new year. I wish others too.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





What the success of a divorce film says about marriage


2020-01-05

Over the past month I have been hearing about the film, Marriage Story, primarily from women. It is as if men don’t watch Netflix, or marry at all.

Usually, a film begins to travel through word-of-mouth because its messengers misunderstand the story to be about them as they “relate” to it, a respectable phenomenon in art, even though it is the same principle that runs astrology. But the enticement of the film is not brought about by any of the pampering tricks of fiction. The power of the film is in the shock of truth.

Marriage Story, written and directed by Noah Baumbach, is a set of quarrels between an American couple as they go through a divorce. Citing the deep realistic bitterness in the film, many people have argued it is yet another reminder that marriage is obsolete. To the contrary, the film is a good ambassador of marriage. This may not be so evident at once.

In a scene in the film, Nicole, played by Scarlett Johansson, screams at her husband, Charlie, played by Adam Driver, that he never knew how to touch her: “Your touch made me want to peel my skin off.” He tells her, “Life with you was joyless.” He says he sacrificed sexual promiscuity for marriage (he is a theatre director). She says she was never happy with him. He tells her that she never had the capacity for happiness, and, in any case, she has chosen not to remember that she was happy once.

The married know too well that life is not an unrehearsed play, as some esoteric men have claimed in the past. Life is repetitive and marriage itself gets better and better through repetition. In fact, married people quarrel well because they have had the same quarrels many times and they know all possible arguments, and they argue even though they know what the other person is going to say and they do not have any new devastating point. The way they cite their histories, you would think no one else has histories and that they are citing history for the first time. But, like their arguments, they have mentioned the same episodes from the past many times. If people followed their own marriages instead of politics, they will realize that when someone starts citing history, it means he has run out of things to say.

Married couples have been lousy ambassadors of marriage because their job has been to perform the public charades of happiness and stability. Nicole and Charlie in Marriage Story are more influential ambassadors of marriage, because as we listen to their conversations, it is as if the vocabulary of marriage and the scope of its quarrels are limited to a few stinging accusations. And, there lies the joyful hope in the film. If everybody is in the same boat, it is the only boat.

Does the human brain remember more vividly a few bad moments in a marriage than the background hum of happy days? This is how, after all, the brain protects us from repeating traumatic experiences—by exaggerating unpleasantness and collapsing half a life of happiness into a vague memory of banality. Then the human brain itself might be one of the most lethal foes of marriage.

The exaggeration of gloom and the underplaying of happiness is at the heart of art itself. Leo Tolstoy was not only portraying the nature of family, but also why literature is the way it is when he wrote, “Happy families are all alike; every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way.”

Marriage Story, though, is the reverse. In its anthropology-grade accuracy, the film conveys that all unhappy days in all marriages of the world are alike; and happy couples are happy in different ways.

Still, can’t there be a perfectly healthy marriage? Just because everyone has the same problems, does it mean we should accept them as normal? If a disease blinds every human in the world tomorrow, will we say blindness is normal, or are we correct in aspiring to the rumour of sight?

In terms of physical and mental health, where an objective measure of a human ideal is known, I believe there is an argument that what is normal need not be the same as what is prevalent. A majority can be “abnormal”. But in relationships, the commonality of serious problems are providential hints that they are normal in the collision between men and women.

But then it is hard for couples to acquire the humility to accept that their relationship is not so unique, that its greatest upheavals are fairly common. What Marriage Story inadvertently conveys is that people who quit a marriage are usually not quitting a person, but the idea of marriage.

The film is sheer anthropology not only in its traumas, but also in its more tender moments. In a scene, Charlie, consumed by rage, lets out a string of nasty accusations at his wife. But she looks at him with kindness, because she knows he did not mean it. Usually, when people are angry they hurt others with truths because only truth can hurt, but couples do not necessarily speak their minds when they are angry.

After this outburst, he breaks down and weeps, and she looks on with satisfied affection, the way some of us see Roger Federer’s tears: He cries because all this means something to him. But, in Charlie’s case, he receives that moment of affection because he clearly does not cry often.

Also, in portraying a divorce, the film shows an aspect of marriage that becomes evident only when it comes apart. A marriage is state intervention in a relationship. And the partnership of an advanced democracy and a woman is formidable.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Why foes of India’s ruling party may be right this time


2020-01-12

People who are not very fond of Prime Minister Narendra Modi have been melodramatic, naive or plain wrong in their reactions to his policies, many of which were not even his ideas.

Their campaign against Aadhaar, which has transformed the lives of the poor despite its early glitches, was at first led by rural affairs middlemen, who were fighting for their own relevance in a changing world. Also, contrary to what such people claim, “demonetization” did destroy the value of illicit money, and the fact that 99.5% of the cancelled cash was returned to banks did not mean that the value of the illicit cash was not degraded before it was returned through proxies. And, their biases prevent them from seeing the fact that the full integration of Kashmir with India contained within its many consequences the liberation of ordinary Kashmiris from their corrupt, well-networked intellectuals. And that the abolition of triple-talaq probably had the support of a majority of Muslim women, at least in social circles that are most affected by such a facile form of divorce. And, activists who call Modi a “fascist” are usually the same serfs of a dominant culture that labels unfamiliar humans by a puerile template—as either saints or “fascists”, or both, as Aung San Suu Kyi discovered.

But the people who are battling Modi over his government’s new citizenship law are right about almost everything they say about his immigration policy, which uses Islam to disqualify a broad segment of undocumented immigrants.

A few days ago, the subject text of an email newsletter from the Prime Minister’s office read: “PM disburses ₹12,000 crore to six crore farmers directly in their bank accounts.” This is the sort of thing Modi wants to do with greater frequency—wire cash directly into the accounts of voters. The amended Citizenship Act, or CAA, as it is widely known, is intended to favour poor Indians at the expense of undocumented foreigners. It belongs to one of the two reformation methods that India has witnessed in recent years. One that works, and the other that sounds sexy in the beginning: The Delhi Metro Way of transforming India, and the Demonetization Way.

The Delhi Metro way of reformation is driven by the unglamorous and difficult task of creating infrastructure first and implementing intelligent designs that make it easy for Indians to follow rules before the grand act of announcing the system’s success. The Delhi Metro first won the respect of Indians by granting them their rights before telling them about the consequences of violating their duties to the nation.

But the CAA is in the league of government policies that are more about grand announcements made without undertaking the dull tasks of creating processes, explaining stuff, reassuring the weak and the nervous, and winning the trust and respect of Indians. The Act says the exciting things first; then fumbles to answer “how” it will be achieved. Why legislate on citizenship when it is still unclear what set of clinching documents would confirm the citizenship of a poor Indian?

The Delhi Metro Way assumes policy is not an idea; rather, policy is implementation of an idea. The Demonetization Way has the swag of a sensational announcement that precedes figuring out boring stuff like how to put new cash in old boxes.

Also, India’s ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) seems at risk of falling into a feedback black hole. I like to call it “the Ram Gopal Varma black hole”. When a person is constantly criticized for his bold ideas, but these keep working, he finds it hard to respect the collective wisdom of the world. Then, when his instincts fail him and he makes bad decisions, he continues to disrespect external voices. Arvind Kejriwal appears to have fallen into such a hole. The BJP is now circling one. When should politicians whose instincts are far superior to those of commentators listen to other voices, especially those that have been wrong or dishonest so many times?

Nothing else explains the baffling stubbornness of the BJP in the face of obvious problems with the CAA. It is as if the party is unable to see the fact that a nation like India cannot discriminate even against foreigners on the basis of their religion. Even Israel does not have a citizenship policy that officially disqualifies those of a particular faith.

Also, there are things the BJP should not do precisely because it is the BJP. Its whole history makes Indian Muslims suspicious. And, the party has announced a string of policies that have greatly affected the lives and minds of Muslims. If the BJP is unconcerned about its image as an organization that has contempt for Muslims, and if this attitude emerges from its electoral charm with Hindus, then it must ask itself this political question: Why is there no political party in the world that claims to represent men?

A political current needs a wound. Of late, men are plagiarizing the movements of the weak to claim victimhood. Donald Trump does try to frame men as a single collective organism under attack. But it is very hard to sculpt a political bloc out of a broad group of dominant humans. Even women in advanced democracies have not managed to convert themselves into a formidable political bloc. So, the Hindu consolidation that the BJP has enjoyed may be momentary. The party has to find newer ways to define itself, more modern ways, even as its foes have successfully created a global perception that India is morally superior to the BJP.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





It’s important not to let idealists put you off idealism


2020-01-19

You might be one of them. When events push you to take a moralistic position, say, about equality, religion or climate, you see the faces of some idealists and you do not wish to be idealistic anymore. You search for the other point of view. Many are this way. This phenomenon is at the heart of why the world votes the way it does and acts in a way that is the exact opposite of what intellectuals say people should do. Many ordinary people who appear to be “right-wing” are so because they hate that one leftist, maybe two. Sometimes, idealists actually do make sense, but the worst thing they do to sense itself is being its evangelists. Can it be that the world would have been far more idealistic if there were no idealists?

A few days ago, the teenage climate-change activist Greta Thunberg admonished tennis legend Roger Federer for endorsing the Switzerland-based investment bank Credit Suisse, which she has accused of funding the exploration of fossil fuels. There is something about all this that annoys you. You love the world, but hate the self-righteous. You cannot be on the same side as such people. You want to build an argument against them. These are young beneficiaries of capitalist societies that, until recently, plundered the world—you want to say—people who have everything, hence have lifestyles that account for much more pollution than an Indian who has never heard of “climate-change”, and are now searching for some meaning to their lives. But this argument, you know, is dull.

Meanwhile, the future employees of Credit Suisse and other banks, the ones who will write the fine print on the contracts that drive capitalism, too, have found their own safe moral outrage. Last November, when the Consul General of Israel in New York, Dani Dayan, was about to begin delivering a talk at Harvard Law School, about a hundred students, more than half his audience, walked out in a planned act of flash posturing against Israel.

You don’t want to have the same sham views as these people. You despise those who inherited their wealth and write long essays lamenting inequality; you are tired of slighted academics getting back at the government through righteous attacks on its policies; and of the clinically depressed who see a world as bleak as their own lives. You can see what these people believe—that they are somehow morally superior to you because they feel beautiful feelings.

What must you do? The ambassadors of giant ideals are often moral midgets. So, what must you do? Maybe it is time you do not let idealists put you off idealism.

Idealism should be ingested very differently by the intelligent, the wise, the analytical, the old, the honest, the non-sentimental, the happy, the strong and the sane.

One way of looking at our ideals is not as grand virtues alone, but chiefly as ideas that have survived and endured. Generations of humans across societies have naturally selected those ideas to endure. Even the ideals that govern the new idealism of climate change are very old. One could argue that the climate change movement is not about climate at all—it is about misanthropy, it is about contempt for humans. Some of our most powerful guiding philosophies against consumption and excesses, and all forms of gluttony, have emerged from the contempt for our race that holds within its contempt the conviction that there is an ideal state of being. Organized misanthropy has always been a minority’s contempt for the majority. The climate change movement is exactly that.

This is how we must see modern idealism, as a complex result of ancient ideas that have had excellent reasons to survive and against which all resistance will be futile.

Another irritant you may have is the realization that most idealists are self-serving. But then selfishness is the most effective way to propagate idealism.

After madness, the best conductor of an idea is self-interest. Without the force of self-interest, good will not be able to fight evil. For instance, the only way the greed of capitalism can be countered is through other forms of self-interests, like the battle of the losers of capitalism against those who are richer than them.

Also, people who are innately good but despise idealism because they despise idealists can save themselves from poor arguments if they just surrender to the power of collective human virtues. Recently, I read an argument that if Indians are allowed to degrade their ecology and prosper, they will eventually become rich enough to care for nature. This sort of nonsense captivates you, not because you hate the idealism of caring for the natural environmental, but the circus of idealists.

You may also consider idealism as heritage. It may have some trappings of modernity, but idealism bears a closer similarity to tradition.

Many traditions have vanished or are vanishing, and are kept alive artificially. Languages and dialects, for instance, that have lost their utility over the years; or dances that are too dreary for anyone. The real heritage of a place is what its cultural middlemen do not have to work hard to conserve—for instance, cuisine and daily wear. The ideals that have survived have the same momentum of time as traditions that have survived. A way to look upon idealists is not as prophets, but as zombies in the trace of a great power they do not fully fathom. So why let zombies come in the way of experiencing an old moral force, which is what idealism is?

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





The most successful anti-government protests yet


2020-01-26

About three years ago, after millions of Indians were told by their Prime Minister that their high-denomination currency notes were worthless and had to be exchanged at the bank, which did not have enough new notes to exchange, there were no riots. There was probably not even a protest that was substantial enough to block traffic.

Last year, when the Supreme Court gave away the land on which the 16th century Babri Masjid once stood to Hindus, Muslims did not erupt in violence, or mass protests.

How then has an amendment to a law on undocumented foreigners inspired the most successful protests yet against Narendra Modi and his Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP)?

Let us first understand the success of the protests, which are still underway. It would be naive to assume that they will diminish the electoral worth of the BJP immediately. If there were any short-term impact at all, the party will gain because the protests serve as an advertisement to a large segment of the Hindus that the BJP is bent on eliminating competition from undocumented Muslims for resources and jobs. But then, even for an Indian political party, elections are not everything.

The global prestige of the party appears to have been damaged. All the exaggerations that its foes had conjured up over the years have a ring of truth now in global perception. Many aspects of the protests are attractive to an influential Western liberal audience. For instance, the fact and the fable that women (in exotic traditional costumes) are driving the protests. All this has caught the attention of the money-bags. In fact, several Western investors have adopted the language of righteous columnists in describing “the situation” in India. Suddenly, India is not a stable place with a strong government in control. The protests mark the beginning of India’s global notoriety.

Why has this happened now? Why has the BJP’s new immigration policy inspired protests of this scale, depth, impact and endurance that its other contentious policies could not create?

Let us look at two events that had the potential to create great organic tumult but passed by without adversely affecting the BJP—“demonetization” and the Supreme Court’s verdict on the Ayodhya dispute. The immediate aftermath of “demonetization” was distorted by the news media. At first, it was not as unpopular as the English press claimed. The average Indian thought the rich Indian must be suffering many times more than him. Some politicians even conveyed to the poor that they did not have to return the loans they had taken from greedy moneylenders. Politicians also chased away collection agents of banks who came to collect loan repayments from small borrowers. Also, there was no simple moral story that could seriously counter the simple moral of “demonetization”. By the time the public began to feel enraged, the government had resolved the cash crunch.

Also, Modi’s popularity was very high in that period. No other Prime Minister could have denied Indians access to their own cash and gotten away.

The loss of the land on which the Babri Masjid stood must have hurt Muslims, but politicians on all sides behaved in an exemplary manner. Most Muslim leaders beseeched the community to respect the court’s decision. Modi, in an admirable move, asked people not to celebrate the verdict.

The amendment of the Citizenship Act is a very different matter. On this, the BJP has no moral defence. What defence can there be for discriminating against people, even if they are undocumented foreigners, on the basis of their religion?

The BJP’s behaviour in this matter is odd and fascinating. This column has earlier argued that the amended Act is chiefly about favouring all poor Indians at the expense of undocumented Muslim immigrants, a policy whose prose is crass but holds in its heart a substantial economic argument. I do not believe that the BJP wishes to antagonize Indian Muslims at all. It gains nothing from it. The time for that method of play is long gone. It is an obsolete argument against the BJP. “No one can dare touch any Indian Muslim,” Union defence minister Rajnath Singh said a few days ago, reflecting what I believe is the honest position of his party in its new avatar, that it does care for India’s Muslims. Also, it is ridiculous to believe that the BJP wants to find ways to disenfranchise over 200 million Muslims. So what is going on? Why is it that the BJP, in its attempt to favour India’s poor, is unable to see why it is so wrong to single out Muslims among undocumented immigrants?

The BJP’s behaviour reminds me of a day when a billionaire walked into a meeting of journalists and taunted them for being “very negative”. “If you wish to criticize to fulfil your need to be negative,” he said, “don’t criticize Indian politicians, criticize people who don’t matter, criticize foreign politicians. Criticize Greece or something.”

The BJP appears to feel that it is alright to overtly discriminate against “foreign” Muslims. The party seems to think, or perhaps thought, it is safe to pick a fight with them. But this has been a miscalculation of how humans and the world operate. The policy has misrepresented the Indian government as a foe of Muslims, and made Indian Muslims who have very little in the way of documentation feel more insecure than before, which a wide spectrum of politicians and the long activist tail of politics have been able to exploit.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous





India’s immense political stamina for useless issues


2020-02-02

Three weeks in January I was in New Zealand, a place of such relentless pastoral beauty that its stray patches of ugliness turned out to be golf courses. There was so much street joy, as people kissed, ran, biked and hiked. From there, if you followed the most important news in India, you would think India, too, has solved all its problems of basic survival and is therefore obsessed with useless issues.

The truth, though, is that our air is poison, we are stranded for half our lives in traffic congestion, we lurk in utter spatial ugliness and chaos. Our children grow up with very low national self-esteem. Usually, nations look richer than they are in reality; India, in plain sight, is poorer than what bank accounts suggest. Yet, the greatest public outrage is reserved for esoteric matters, issues that are not about the quality of life; that will, in fact, only make living here worse.

Friday night, in a posh Gurgaon club called Quorum, I asked politician Subramanian Swamy, who had just announced to his audience that he was the “second most popular man in the [Bharatiya Janata Party]”, why this was so. Why do we have such immense political stamina for useless issues?

He understood the spirit of what I meant by “useless”—issues that will not improve the lives and prospects of most Indians. Religious and other cultural identities are primarily the domain of the upper classes, which hold all the cards. How then have they transmitted this disease of identity so easily down the classes? How is it that a Subramanian Swamy has got a Kanhaiya Kumar embroiled in the same useless debates around identity?

Swamy told me, correctly, that identity is not a trivial thing, that religious, caste or national identity matters to a vast section of Indians. But then, that was not the substance of my question. “Why” was my question. Why is it that a majority of the nation that lives in appalling conditions wastes its political energies on issues that hardly matter to their lives? Why don’t people agitate for air-conditioned transport and water and electricity and free schools more often than they do for esoteric things? Or, at least peacefully vote for these issues, as the people of Delhi have begun to do recently, since the advent of the Aam Aadmi Party?

Some powerful forces are at play, apart from the most obvious element, which is that the upper classes have a disproportionate control over storytelling. The fundamental nature of stories and storytellers, too, is responsible.

A story is a very corrupt thing. A story is not an event, but an interesting event. And, here lies its deviousness. What is interesting in a story is not what is important in life. At times, the two do meet, but that is very rare.

This is why politics is the way it is and why democracy itself may be doomed in the long run. The most captivating stories are not necessarily true, nor what will make our lives better. People “identify” with stories not out of wisdom or clarity, but impelled by that highly influential force—misunderstanding. Clarity is often inconvenient, while misunderstanding is a pleasurable massage of prejudice.

Far more important is the nature of storytellers. The edginess of a good storyteller does not emerge from virtues like sanity, sobriety, clarity and stability. The mad, the melancholic, the enraged and the innately melodramatic tell the best stories. They are too good for more sober or moral storytellers who try to win people over through common sense, say, through the promise of better infrastructure, schools and hospitals.

Even politicians who know the game, who try hard to be interesting and dramatic only to achieve moral ends, eventually get caught in the process of storytelling, and fail to reach their end.

But can’t issues co-exist? Can’t religious identity co-exist with duller things like infrastructure? The problem, as we see in India, is that political focus is a zero-sum game; the political stamina of the public is finite. Everything is at the expense of something else. Dull but transformative issues, like matters that affect the quality of life, often cannot compete with religion or caste.

There is a parallel in India’s space programme. Its fans raised a question right at the start, when its morality in a poor country was challenged: Why can’t a space programme co-exist with the eradication of malaria? Should a nation wait to kill all its mosquitoes before it sends metal to space? But then, considering that rocket science is easier than eradicating poverty or malaria, we arrive at the very reason why societies do some sexy things—to hide their failures in more substantial and difficult ventures.

The exotic issues of Indian politics exist not because Indians so love their culture. They exist because it is easier to demolish a mosque or build a temple than it is to enrich India or even enforce intelligent road design. But then, isn’t it true that matters of great relevance can hide within esoteric issues? For instance, support for the government’s discrimination of foreign Muslims is more about a fear of the economic immigrant than Islam.

True, issues of identity and culture often conceal more practical matters. But then why do we hide important things in less important things? That, in essence, is our problem. I hope that one day a cunning patriotic humanitarian billionaire will create breakthrough visual effects that will create the illusion of god, who will then order Indians to drive in their lanes and keep the nation clean.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





How the Indian street agitator suddenly got serious


2020-02-09

Not long ago, Indian agitators were scrawny men who erupted in something that resembled joy, and went in a festive procession, laughing and waving at the news cameras. They were very different from the more serious and athletic Palestinians or Kashmiris who pelted stones at SUVs, using correct throwing techniques.

Often, agitating Indians made effigies, which all looked the same, perhaps the reason why they always had name tags. At times, the police, with no particular provocation, would charge as though they had decided to go home early. And the fleeing protesters, in trying to get some distance between their backs and the baton, finally looked serious.

Indian agitators today have gotten better at agitating. How did they get so serious?

Nothing in the history of street protests in India would have predicted the gravity and style of modern urban Indian protests.

Even though the first heroes of free India were actually agitators, our street protests after the departure of the British were, curiously, farces. There were exceptions, but my point is in the generalization.

In Chennai, where I was raised, Tamil politicians frequently went on “fasts unto death”, with long torchlights stuffed with bananas that they secretly consumed. Once, some people went on a fast unto death, and a rival group assembled across the road and swore to eat biryani until they died.

Inspired by Gandhi, hundreds of Indians in free India have gone on death fasts, including an umpire who wanted to be given more matches to officiate. Most of them neither died nor got what they fought for. It is as if what Indians picked up from Gandhi was not the option of death in such a fast, but of ending it with the ceremonial orange juice.

The late Tamil Nadu chief minister J. Jayalalithaa, too, had gone on a death fast. It is hard for me to forget the scene. She loomed large under a tent as malnourished women around her wailed and begged her to eat.

There have been very serious and substantial peaceful protests in modern India, like the Chipko movement during which villagers, mostly women, tried to save their forest from corporations by hugging trees and not letting go. But these movements are islands of seriousness in an ocean of farce.

Through this all, the elite did not take part in street protests. In Kerala and West Bengal, the urban middle classes were not unfamiliar with agitation. And, of course, there were the posh gaanja Naxals who were about to change the world, but when the police caught them, they called their papas to rescue them from reality. Even so, it is reasonable to say that until very recently, India’s elite did not agitate. Even the early feminist agitations were mostly political festivities of the provincial. For instance, a protest march in the 1990s of a group of women who, enraged by online nudity, stood outside the American consulate asking America to punish an American company called “The Internet”.

Many cultural protests, too, though visually intimidating, were farces. Like one by Bharatiya Kamgar Sena members who demonstrated outside a restaurant called Bombay Blue and demanded that it be called Mumbai Blue.

The agitations of more lethal cultural organizations were never really agitations; they were criminal assaults. Every year, several groups across India attack lovers on Valentine’s Day. They dole out instant punishment, even marry off some of the couples. Once in Mumbai, Shiv Sainiks invaded a Valentine’s Day party and beat up the youth. This led to one of the most courageous protests in India. The host of that ill-fated party, a young man, threw another Valentine’s Day party in defiance. Many attended. It went off peacefully.

Around the time, in 2007, an artist was attacked by guardians of Hindu values for a painting that contained some nudity, and it was the artist whom the police first arrested. A dozen art lovers went to the Jehangir Art Gallery and held up elegant English placards that said in aesthetic fonts things like, “Live in Fear”. I wondered whom they were talking to. Were they talking among themselves, standing outside a gallery? They looked like installation art.

The Indian urban middle class did eventually become serious agitators, and that happened all of a sudden. In November 2008, when 10 terrorists from Pakistan attacked Mumbai, a segment of the urban middle class, who always had contempt for politicians, erupted. They found an ally in news television. And, for a short period, they believed that the nexus between the middle class and the media could defeat the tyranny of the majority. This was the genesis of the anti-corruption movement. At the time, Delhi’s Westernized liberal media did not realize that the anti-corruption movement was in reality a new middle-class revolt against the Congress party.

That movement trained a new generation to agitate and to believe in agitation as a moral force. They hit the streets again when news broke that a young woman was raped by several men in a moving bus in Delhi. The agitators successfully cast rape as political failure.

Now, the Indian urban agitator is more complex, and agitations are a braid of many classes—the candle people, the techies, the merchants and the vast poor. For the first time in free India, its middle class youth are deeply interested in politics as illusions of an easy rich life in the West have receded. And they don’t wave at the cameras anymore.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





The modernity of Arvind Kejriwal’s Hindu politics


2020-02-16

This year, the Academy Awards ceremony may have reminded millions of Americans why they veer toward Donald Trump. Usually the dullest part of the ceremony is the gushing gratitude of the winners who have, in the past, thanked Harvey Weinstein more often than God, according to an analysis of Oscar speeches. This year, it was dull for the sheer amount of righteous posturing. Joaquin Phoenix lectured us about animals rights; Natalie Portman wore a cape that carried names of female directors who had never been honoured at the Oscars, even though Portman herself has worked with very few women directors. A documentary film-maker whose work was funded by the Obamas quoted The Communist Manifesto. And Jane Fonda said that to reduce waste, she would not buy new clothes anymore.

There is nothing wrong with anything they said. In fact, they said the right things. Even so, the way of the world is that the facile moral posturing of the rich and beautiful pushes ordinary folks to take a political stand that is the exact opposite. It makes good people take the side of down-to-earth evil.

But there are some public figures who have the ability to appear highly idealistic without putting off the masses. Barack Obama is one of them. And for very different reasons, Arvind Kejriwal.

There are a few reasons why Kejriwal’s righteousness does not annoy most voters, apart from the broad reason that he is male and the world has a mysterious intolerance of righteous women, as American presidential candidate Elizabeth Warren is beginning to find out.

There is a manner in which Kejriwal speaks that ensures what he says is never a lecture. He reminds me of one of the best insights into public speaking I have ever read, which was a piece of wisdom Bal Thackeray’s father gave him—that a politician should not preach, he should “gossip with the people”.

Kejriwal gossips with voters. He says what is wrong, who is responsible, and he keeps it all simple. A few years ago, at the start of his career as an electoral politician, he seemed to figure out that there were many things journalists could not say in fear of libel, and other reasons, but they could say those things by quoting him. And for a brief period, he hosted dramatic press conferences to gossip. It was all very interesting.

Also, his austere clothing is not the fancy dress of Indian politics, where politicians are clad in a way Indians almost never are. How Kejriwal appears is very close to the average Indian male. His is more authentic than Gandhi’s attire in his time or even that of R.K. Laxman’s common man.

But more important than all this is the fact that he does not derive his values from the Western template of idealism. Liberal templates are useful for people who are inherently jerks, but wish to be good people or look good.

Kejriwal is a provincial man, a temple-goer, a man who believes in God. He calls for the death of rapist-murderers, glorifies patriotism, and believes that Kashmir belongs to India. He is not infected by the template of organized compassion.

Recently, when an interviewer asked him to recite the Hanuman Chalisa, he recited it. He was not foolish enough to deny his Hindu devotion just because he needed Muslim votes. And he is not afraid to call India “Bharat Mata”, or chant Vande Mataram. He knows that every religious person, no matter of what faith, fully understands and respects the devotion of the other.

He has challenged Hindu nationalists to chant any of the sacred Hindu hymns. He claims they are fake Hindus. It would be comical if someone ambushes famous Hindu nationalists and challenges them to prove their devotion by reciting the Hanuman Chalisa or even Vande Mataram.

In this way, Kejriwal is a modern Hindu politician—a believer who is culturally rooted to faith and nation, but says all religions must coexist. He always stops short of annoying average Hindus by not labouring the point of “secularism”.

His greatest quality though is the cunning to win elections in India without illicit money or inciting tension. Kejriwal is a reminder that the guardians of the poor and the weak have a moral obligation not to be political duds—those well-meaning men, who were genetically ordained to enter politics, activists who lament everything but can barely save themselves, righteous artists. For, in the care of duds, the poor always lose, even as the duds ensure more capable leaders do not emerge.

Kejriwal’s most important decision in his professional life was to take on the duds. That is how he pivoted from low-stakes sanctimonious activism, which involved intermittent fasting, to high-stakes politics. As an activist who created an anti-Congress movement, which was widely misunderstood as an anti-corruption movement, he was a part of a cabal that swore not to enter politics because politics was “dirty”. The fight against corruption, they suggested, was best left to a group of Magsaysay winners. When he was a safe activist, India’s upper classes celebrated him, but when he entered electoral politics, they found reasons to despise him because he was now a potent threat. They called him “an anarchist”.

The nationalism of the Bharatiya Janata Party is of pride. Kejriwal’s nationalism goes beyond, as it is built on shame. India has done foolish things in search of pride; the country has achieved much when it has been ashamed of itself.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Inside the mind of an Indian fan of Donald Trump


2020-02-23

In the late 1990s when Bill Gates visited Mumbai, the road from the airport to South Mumbai was shut to let Gates zip through the city. People lined the road to get a glimpse of the world’s richest man. Mumbai, which is still naïve in a rustic way, is not so much in awe anymore of a mere richest man or even a pop icon. The rest of the nation, too, has moved on. Indians are more likely to be excited by air-conditioned trains with automatic doors than famous people.

So the Indian government’s extravagant welcome to US President Donald Trump is anachronistic. Yet there is meaning to how Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi has chosen to celebrate the president. Trump is a completely new sort of famous person. He was not made in the factory that had a monopoly over the manufacture of an American icon. As a result, his Indian admirers are not the same people who traditionally invested emotion in an American president. They seem to love Trump because they see Modi in him.

The average Indian fan of Trump likes him for the same reason he likes Modi—he likes himself, has his own ideas of how to govern a nation, projects these onto certain politicians, and then starts admiring them because he believes they think like him.

Until recently, he had to hide his political and social views from his own family and friends, but now his ideas have become mainstream. Billionaires and actors openly share his views. He sees in Trump a man who, like Modi, was condemned by arts professors but rehabilitated by voters.

He sees a similarity between the Modi government’s new immigration policy and Trump’s apparent efforts to stop the influx of foreign Muslims. But he misses a crucial difference. Despite Trump’s pronouncements, his official policy has enough sophistication not to overtly discriminate on the basis of religion. The Indian government appears not to have been quite as smart.

He imagines that there is a global fellowship of strongmen from various nations who have uniform views, just as those posh global liberals have about Muslims, transgenders and dams. And he is very confused when conservatives in the West, and Trump himself, express pious views on India’s “human rights abuses”. It does not occur to him that conservatives have strong positions only in a space that matters to them—home. Elsewhere, they are sweet because it costs nothing. As this column once argued, “When the stakes are low we are all leftists.”

He is also an object of wonder for writers who cannot make out what ordinary people like him, who are not very rich or successful, see in an unethical billionaire. The fact is, for most people in the world, class is more repulsive than wealth. Wealth is interesting, class is caste.

Like Trump, his Indian fan is on the side of strength. He believes that people are genetically and racially ordained to do well, and that luck plays a very small role. And he has read the synopsis of Chanakya’s Arthashastra and thinks that being Chanakya is to be slyly practical. And he believes Trump is just that.

There is another type of Indian Trump fan who is not necessarily a fan of Modi. He is the papa of a feminist.

It is all so oppressive for this patriarch. One, he is called a patriarch, derisively, but has no power in his own home anymore. He can’t even say women’s tennis is boring. But then Trump says stuff, deadly stuff, especially about women who have no respect for patriarchs. Trump represents a revolt against all politically correct despots.

Also, Trump has a wife who is beautiful and much younger than him. This reminds ageing men that there is always a second chance, or is it third? Whatever it is, it is another chance at living the way men really want to live.

And there is something about this Elizabeth Warren, a Democrat in the race for the White House. She disturbs him. He is unable to understand why he hates her, but he knows he has to present logical arguments against her. The way he presents his case, it is as though he has thought deeply, and then, as a result of his deep thoughts, developed a dislike for Warren. But then we know that instinct comes first, and the arguments follow.

Even as the patriarch thinks of moral reasons why he dislikes Warren (such as: her idealism will destroy the global economy), his own affection for Trump has a certain art-grade moral greyness.

Until Trump came along, political analysis had one puzzling nature. At the heart of all analysis was the notion that voting is a highly moral act. It did confuse him—how, when he had so many mean thoughts, political analysts presumed that he would turn righteous when he went to vote. For instance, in the US, it was unthinkable for a man who was caught having an extramarital affair to run for president. Trump has shown that the voter is not as unforgiving of human flaws as analysts once claimed.

There are a few other types of Trump fans in India. For instance, people who care very little about Trump but are pushed to love anything that the new breed of self-righteous radicals hate.

Even among the elite, or the “broccoli-eaters”, there are secret admirers of Trump who covertly despise their own emasculation. They usually hide their love for Trump very well, but on occasion they reveal a bit of it through a cautious statement that begins with a condemnation of Trump and then “but you know” followed by a logical argument they read somewhere for free.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Riots happen because we tend to romanticize chaos


2020-03-01

As expected after a riot, good journalists are reporting insufferable stories about how Hindus saved Muslims, and Muslims saved Hindus. I dread noble images of a temple and a mosque coexisting peacefully on a single encroached space. Not because these stories are nonsensical, but because they are pointless in understanding a riot, or what will cause the next.

You may say these stories make you feel good. But why should you feel good, and of what use is that? Maybe it is more useful if we try to reach the truth, and go easy on the bull of juxtaposing people in varied costumes and calling it harmony. That is not harmony. Harmony is not coexistence, nor that silly word “tolerance”. Harmony is coexistence enforced by the order of a primary thug, like a government.

Would most humans kill other humans if there were no punitive authority? That is a fascinating question, but inessential to the column for now, though it will be interesting to ask yourself what are the crimes you will commit if you are absolutely sure you will get away. What is relevant for the moment is the fact that just a handful of criminals, sadists and other deranged people are enough to create a riot. The rest can hug, it doesn’t make a difference.

The real reason why there are violent riots in India is in our romanticism of chaos. Chaos trains all Indians, from birth, to break rules on public property and to misunderstand that as democratic freedom. A nation born out of civil disobedience never had leaders of stature who deeply believed in civic order. It is the same chaos that lends a righteous edge to disruptive and illegal street agitations, and to a politician so disrespectful of the law that he had the courage to overtly threaten agitators that if they did not clear the way in three days, there would be violence. And it is the same chaos that creates an impotent police force.

If the Delhi Police had pounced on the rioters the way they pounce on an unarmed biker who is not wearing a helmet—eight cops popping out from behind a pillar—there would have been no deaths. But then most cops in Delhi are not equipped to handle anything more serious than a motorist. It is astonishing that they do not actually flee at the first sign of trouble. They would have the moral right to do so. No police force in any civilized democracy looks as impoverished as Indian police. They command no respect, no fear in the eyes of dangerous people. And, as we have seen, they take too long to respond to a riot.

Any way you look at it, humanity is divided into two opposing groups—innate villagers who respect social order more than civic order, and those who are innately urban who respect civic order and have contempt for social order. Villagers don’t always live in villages and citizens don’t always live in cities. India is largely a nation of rustics led by village headmen. Once, when India’s software industry asked for good roads, the chief minister of Karnataka then, H.D. Deve Gowda, threatened them that if they tried to bring global urban values to Bengaluru, he would bring the villages to the city.

India compensates for its chaos in many ways. One is through chaos itself. For instance, the extrajudicial killings of rapists and other dangerous criminals. The other powerful compensation for civic and administrative chaos is through social order.

What maintained relative “harmony” in India after the Gujarat riots of 2002 was the transmission of a fear among Muslims that the next time some criminals among them expressed “rage”, the retaliation of criminals on the other side would be severe and disproportionate. Since then, the Muslim community worked hard not to strike an aggressive pose, no matter what the provocation. But somehow, over the past few weeks, activists gave some Muslims in Delhi a false reassurance of modern India’s large heart for their agitations so long as they were “peaceful”, another meaningless term. An agitation is not necessarily “peaceful” just because there is no violence. It was ridden with tension. Politicians and activists then said things that provoked Hindus and Muslims alike. We don’t know who cast the first stone; we never know because we have naive definitions of a stone and casting.

What Muslims were protesting, the amended citizenship Act, itself is a product of typical Indian chaos. India does not know its own definition of an Indian citizen, yet it enacted a piece of legislation that would have isolated an unknown number of Indians, probably millions, as foreigners. Why couldn’t India clearly state the set of documents that would prove one’s citizenship so that Indians are not confused about their fate or at least know what they are fighting against? Because India operates through chaos.

Even when the government tried to reform motorists, recently, by imposing huge fines on traffic violations, it did it in a chaotic way. India did not improve its road design or draw fresh medians or build walkways or remove shrubbery blocking traffic signals. Just imposed fines.

At some level, chaos comforts Indians because it is a form of freedom that has been glorified in many simple ways. That pop culture refrain, “We are like that only”, for instance. Also, the spurious Indian view that Western civilization is “lonely” in leading orderly lives, while India is a giant carnival. And there is that timeless Indian assurance: “In the end, everything will work out.”

Why not in the beginning? That is the question the whole civilization has been unable to answer.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Why a majority’s story often fails to convince the world


2020-03-08

Across the world, a large number of Hindus are angry. Others are saying that there was a mass murder of Muslims in India last month. American and European politicians, professors, taxi drivers and the most serious people of our times, comedians, are using words like “pogrom” and “genocide” to describe the recent Delhi riots in which fewer than 60 people were killed. Upset Hindus want to say that it is a small number for unnatural Indian deaths, by Indian standards, which is one of those Indian statements that is at once a fact and a gaffe. They do manage to point out that many of the dead were actually Hindus, but the world is not listening.

US presidential hopeful, Bernie Sanders said there was “widespread anti-Muslim mob violence”, and another noted American politician, Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (AOC) said Prime Minister Narendra Modi was “ethnically cleansing” India’s “religious minorities”. Those who live here know these statements are not only outlandish but could also put the lives of many of us in India in danger, as they are reportedly being exploited by Islamist terror groups.

The most enduring images of the riots were of assaults on Muslims and of cops themselves joining Hindu mobs to attack Muslims. But much later emerged footage of a large apparently Muslim mob armed with stones and sticks assaulting a few poorly equipped cops. More contagious than this video clip was the image of a cinematic young Muslim called Shahrukh pointing a gun at an unarmed cop. If this had occurred in the US, Shahrukh would have been shot dead by the police. Neither Sanders nor AOC would have questioned the right of the police to shoot an armed raging man.

Why is it that angry Hindus have been unable to tell their side of the story to the world? How is it that the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party, whose area of speciality is telling great stories to a billion Hindus, seems to have failed in this matter? A rookie writer in the global liberal network can tell a more influential lie than the most powerful political party in the world can convey a dull fact.

There are three broad reasons why the Hindu camp has been unable to tell its side.

One: The fact is that nobody cares. People think that stories are powerful because everybody cares about these. This is wrong. The truth is that nobody cares for your story or for you. What matters to people is themselves. They are always searching for themselves or their beliefs and prejudices in a story. Sanders or AOC might see in the riots what they wish to see—a majority oppressing a minority. “Hindus and Muslims equally to blame” is not a story, not even a retweetable tweet.

We often think a misunderstanding is due to lack of understanding. But often, people misunderstand because it is more interesting and suits them at that point in time. Empathy itself is a medium of misunderstanding, not understanding.

The world has extolled “empathy” as the most human of all human qualities, but it is a process of self-absorption. It is this force that made some Muslim nations condemn India for the riots. The Supreme Leader of Iran, Ayatollah Khamenei, said: “The hearts of Muslims all over the world are grieving over the massacre of Muslims in India.” He may never give work visas to low-skilled Indian Muslims, but his heart will beat for them, just as the hearts of Indian Hindus beat for Pakistani Hindus, as though Indian Hindus treat one another with so much love they now need foreigners to love.

Two: Exaggerations protect the weak. Many Indian journalists, who knew better, saw no need to refute claims that the riots were “a genocide” or “ethnic cleansing”, and wisely so.

From reports that have emerged, it is clear that in the first hours both Hindus and Muslims were responsible for the violence. But then, cops sought revenge on Muslims for a violent attack on them. Hindu criminals meanwhile were better organized for a modern dark strategy, which was to hand out disproportionate punishment to Muslims. Impoverished Muslims are extremely vulnerable in a riot. Sometimes, truth is not as important as the protection of the weak from the strong. Exaggerations serve to defend the weak.

Also, what is tricky about a riot is that an objective analysis can be right one day, and completely wrong the next. What was “spontaneous” for three hours can transform into a planned attack, as we have seen before. So, there is no motivation for many sane and humane influencers to be “objective” when exaggerations that get the world’s attention can help India’s Muslims more than their own politicians. An old code of survival is that when your thug cannot protect you, find a bigger thug. The West is the bigger thug for Indian Muslims.

Reason three: You cannot beat liberals in storytelling. The response of hurt Hindus to their global defamation has chiefly been lament. But it is in the nature of storytelling that the strong tell bad stories. A majority population, or the victors of an era, cannot transmit powerful stories of their suffering. A defining quality of our times is that the strong are trying to imitate the ways of the oppressed to tell their stories. Brahmins, Caucasians, Israelis, and men have all tried. But it does not work.

Considering the nature of storytelling, there is no way a majority can tell their side. One way to ensure that they are not defamed in the future, though, is to ensure that there are no riots in India.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





What the coronavirus crisis reveals of human nature


2020-03-15

A few months ago, Venkatraman Ramakrishnan, a winner of the Nobel Prize in chemistry, explained to me the relationship between sex and death. Nature gifted us sex to “shuffle the card deck of genes” and see which combination thrives. But the lottery of life also requires the elderly to stop competing, “to somewhat get out of the way”. Thus, death is the price we pay for sex.

But then, “Californian billionaires are having such a good time at the party of life that they don’t want it to stop.” So, they are investing billions of dollars in solving the problem of mortality. But this is not their most interesting reaction to death.

When news of the coronavirus disease broke, American tech billionaires were the most influential transmitters of its seriousness, and of the deceptive speed of any exponential growth. If it were not for them, most governments would have done far worse than their current miserable performance.

Usually, tech billionaires overreact to danger. There is a reason why they speak so much about artificial intelligence and machines taking over the world. Human beings tend to have an inherent need to be oppressed, to a reasonable extent. Resisting this oppression then becomes the primary preoccupation of life. But tech billionaires are not oppressed by anything human, so they see their oppressors in intelligent machines. And, of course, in lethal viruses and death.

In this way, the pandemic that is underway, which has brought the world to a near-standstill, reveals aspects of human nature that usually lurk beneath the complex surface of normal life.

In reacting to the pandemic, especially in its early days, people appeared to have a plan, but they were only being true to their personalities. Alpha paranoids infected their paranoid followers, and alpha optimists infected theirs. Usually, optimists make sense, but in response to the pandemic, it turns out the paranoid were right, and the optimists have looked silly.

But, often what appears to be personality is a hierarchy of underlying interests. Elon Musk, usually among the tech billionaires who overreact to any news of human doom, was as optimistic as old-world businessmen like Donald Trump. “The coronavirus panic is dumb,” Musk tweeted on 7 March. Paul Graham, the co-founder of Y-Combinator replied: “With exponential functions you want to err on the side of caution.”

Musk’s uncharacteristic optimism could have been because he wanted the recent high momentum of Tesla, and hell for an army of Tesla stock short-sellers, to continue. At a time when his usual paranoia would have helped him anticipate the spread of a disease, he was misled by hope.

A defining quality of our age is that leaders of the modern world in every field—business, politics, science and arts—are constantly imparting their analyses. Millions follow these leaders to make sense of our age. Yet, these leaders are often wrong. Whole nations got it wrong.

The most naive analysis that scores of nations made was assuming that only some countries were affected by the virus, hence proceeding to test only people arriving from there—just four even in late February. It did not occur to the most influential people in the world that most countries appeared free of Covid-19 simply because they were not testing for the disease. India banning people from China and Italy, but allowing the rest of the world to enter, reminded me of people who were concerned about the pesticide content in colas as though the rest of the sugary drink was healthy to consume.

In all the noise emanating from the world, there is a whisper that I find most interesting. It comes from some respectable nooks of Western civilization, and the whispers carry dissent against the very idea of democracy, and praise for autocracies.

A spectrum of democracy’s devouts have praised China and Singapore for their tough response to the disease, a level of astonishing efficiency that was attainable only to such undemocratic political systems. British economist Jim O’Neill said, correctly: “Thank God this didn’t start in somewhere like India, because there’s absolutely no way that the quality of Indian governance could move to react in the way that the Chinese have done, that’s the good side of the Chinese model…”

The US and Britain, too, have responded to the crisis poorly, or that is what people whose stories reach us are saying.

The emerging voice that we can hear from Western intellectuals is appreciation for the efficiency of a powerful state that is not answerable to a cacophony of activists, and that there is something obsolete and foolish about the chaos of democracy, its bleak dissenters and the notion of individual liberty that come in the way of swift solutions.

This message isn’t new. Ever since Trump and Brexit, there have been grumblings about democracy from some of its influential evangelists. Democracy, they mutter, has become too democratic. If professors and award-winning journalists cannot influence the masses, what will become of the free world? Look at how the US is run today.

The taunt itself is not as interesting as the psychological medium through which it travels. In what China and Singapore have done to contain Covid-19, people can see a humanitarian triumph even as global distributors of halos are withdrawing the auras from the US, Britain and Europe.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





We may finally have a chance to transform the country


2020-03-22

Do you believe there are reformers? People who can make other people quit what they want to do and instead do what is not so enjoyable, natural or profitable to them? Preachers who want to say, “why can’t you be like me?”, but say something nicer to achieve the same end? Can a very popular person, like a film star or political leader, be the perfect reformer?

A star is the creation of a society; almost an employee. How then can a star change society? A star may say noble things now and then, and everyone likes that, but if he tries too hard to change people, they might change their star. People even change gods if they get too demanding. That is why no god anywhere in the world has tried to take away sugar from people. And a person who is not a star is an ineffective reformer.

That a society changes because of reformers is a spurious history written by reformers. Societies transform when people have no other choice but to transform; like how men become better men when they cannot get away with the things their fathers did.

A pandemic has all the qualities of a transformational event. And Prime Minister Narendra Modi is in a unique position to use it to change many aspects of the nation that are otherwise hard to change.

The ongoing Covid-19 pandemic has transmitted the fear of death in India without the misery of too many deaths, or the bitterness of caste and religious tensions. India today is filled with a rare form of paranoia that has no human foes. Last Thursday, Modi highlighted this aspect of the crisis while asking Indians to perform a national sacrifice by staying at home on Sunday, and to practise a mechanical action in unison for five minutes—clap and clang bells. This was to train Indians to do more significant things in the future, as a community.

Modi keeps asking us to reform ourselves and do noble things for the nation. But under normal circumstances, nothing much happens. The reality of a pandemic, though, gives his government an unprecedented opportunity to do revolutionary things.

For instance, the government should give itself a reasonable deadline after which it should make it illegal for a crush of humanity to be squeezed into small spaces, like public buses and trains. Actually, it is officially illegal in India for “large animals” to be transported the way human Indians often are.

The contagious nature of Covid-19, and the fact that everyone will be affected by the misfortune of a few, gives India a chance to reform itself without the frivolity of morality, or shallow concern for the poor. Instead, what the country has been presented with is the conviction of self-interest.

The pandemic also gives the country a chance to get draconian about hygiene and public order. The Prime Minister’s cleanliness drive, Swachh Bharat, his best policy in my view, has remained a fringe movement that never achieved the emotional force of less useful Indian obsessions, like religious and caste identities. If Modi musters all his storytelling talent, he could use corona to make cleanliness the central priority of India for many months to come, even years. And, as public obsession is a zero-sum game, where one story is at the expense of other stories, a central focus on hygiene, health and public aesthetics can deplete the power of bleak activists who thrive on cultural paranoia and the tiring civil wars of identity.

Health paranoia is probably the most intelligent form of paranoia, and it can diminish the potency of wasteful paranoias that take over our public lives.

On Thursday, a man who was riding a bike in Mumbai sneezed and some paranoid pedestrians reportedly beat him up. This is extraordinary because usually Indians don’t expect anything in the way of hygiene from other Indians on a road. An Indian enjoys foolishly high levels of civil freedoms and individual liberties in public spaces, perhaps on par with animals in a protected sanctuary. The typical citizen seems trained to believe that what is good for others is never good for him. In large parts of India, spitting, dumping garbage, urinating and defecating wherever people want are a way of being human. It is time to end this freedom in a forceful way.

This will also be politically useful for the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party, as agitations tend to become expensive in a more orderly society.

Most Indians, including politicians and bureaucrats, harbour the notion that the comfort of public utilities is a form of luxury, hence something that most Indians do not expect, or even feel they deserve. But we have always demonstrated that the more swanky a public space, the more citizens respect its rules of order and the better they work at keeping it clean. High aesthetics in a given space inform Indians that there has been a departure from civic incompetence here, that someone is doing his job well, and if they fool around, they will efficiently be fined.

India’s dull notions about the nobility of spatial poverty are not limited to politicians. Bleak humanitarians who lament that Mumbai’s airport is luxurious while its train stations are plain, display the same misunderstanding. The fact is that the luxury of Indian airports, while not at the expense of train stations, serve as aspirational models for what other public spaces can become.

Modi should use the hysteria around Covid-19 to first get our public spaces in good shape, and then to tame some harmful Indian civic freedoms.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





An important but indecent question that has to arise


2020-03-29

In every crisis, there is one idea that is sacred, and one question that is indecent. In the viral pandemic that is underway, the sacred idea is that the world should be locked down for many weeks, even months. And the indecent question is: “But what about the economy?” The most sacrilegious form of the indecent question is: “Has the world overreacted to the virus?”

The world has not overreacted to the virus. That the priority of any government is to save human lives and not to make money is a moral code that suits all of us.

Governments make money from cigarettes and liquor, by taxing them, but faced with a pandemic, it is somehow indecent to ask whether a dominant moral idea should come at the expense of financial ruin for billions of people.

Scientists, capitalists, politicians and writers who have expressed concern at the shutting down of entire economies have faced a string of public insults from other scientists, economists, journalists and probably even devious quants who have shorted everything that could possibly be short-sold. Insults are dud weapons; even so, most people in the world fear being insulted.

As often, US President Donald Trump has articulated a thought that is on the minds of people who run businesses but are too polite to say it: “We can’t let the cure be worse than the problem.” He announced that he will open the US for business in a matter of days. A familiar lament followed. A journalist posed the president an old sanctimonious retort that masquerades as a question: How many lives will Trump sacrifice for the economy? (“None,” replied Trump, obviously.)

On Thursday, Sachin Bansal, co-founder of Flipkart, reacted to India’s relief package for the poor with this tweet: “I hope there’s plan to eventually get people back to work also”. A self-righteous person with six followers responded, “I hope there’s a plan to feed people until they get back to work”. Bansal had to flee with the chant, “Thats most important right now.”

John Ioannidis, an epidemiologist, wondered in an article if the world was overreacting to the disease through expensive indefinite lockdowns, and if nations should instead respond to it the way they do to the flu and other mysterious viral infections that are as deadly but not famous enough to have well-recognized names. Public insults from peers followed. Insults are influential concept-delivery devices, and the concept they tended to carry in Ioannidis’s case was the argument of “second-order effects”: the principle that an event has primary consequences that might be obvious or predictable, but it is hard to predict the consequences of the consequences.

But then, the same argument can be used to defend the critical nature of normal economic life. We do not fully know the second-order effects of shutting down whole nations. Neil Ferguson, an epidemiologist at Imperial College London who was among the scientists who influenced the UK to lock itself down, said this about the economic implications: “We’ll be paying for this year for decades to come.”

Last week in the US, 3.25 million people applied for unemployment benefits. This is five times the previous weekly record for such applications, which was in 1982.

Right from the start of the Covid-19 pandemic, there have been two moral ways of responding. One was the Chinese way, involving a full lockdown, and the other was the South Korean way of letting most of the economy run but testing people extensively for infection and tracking down cases. South Korea appears to have contained the disease as effectively as China. Japan is another major economy that has not locked down. Nor is it conducting extensive checks. Yet, Japan is not as seriously affected as, say, Italy, which has enforced a lockdown.

Many in the lockdown camp seem confused by Japan’s good fortune and their tone almost suggests they want that country to implode in the misery of viral deaths just to teach the world a lesson—to lock down. Meanwhile a lot of spurious “cultural” reasons are being promoted to explain Japan’s luck: how clean the Japanese are, how often they wash hands, and so on.

Early in the pandemic, the UK, whose Prime Minister Boris Johnson has now tested positive for Covid, made a disastrous mistake— in storytelling. It wanted to keep the country open, and in its search for a moral reason, it hinted that it was attempting a strategy of herd immunity— where you let most of the population get infected, and let some die, but help society overall develop antibodies against the virus. It was a bad story to tell, as the idea that some deaths are acceptable easily evokes moral repugnance. Also, we still do not know how long someone can stay immune to a virus that mutates. The UK’s argument should unabashedly have focused on sustaining the country’s economy.

All of India has been locked down for the first time in its history. Road accidents have possibly reduced by a considerable extent over the past few days. The world appears perplexed by the slow spread of the disease in India. It could just be that our social inequalities saved us. The rich, who are the primary carriers of the virus, and the poor do not go to the same places. But then, at the time of writing this, India has tested only about 25,000 people. So we don’t know the real numbers. Maybe we will never know. But in a few weeks, India might claim a great victory over the virus and open its doors to business. The country may have no other option.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





No, this novel coronavirus won’t transform the world


2020-04-05

In the entire history of prose, does this sentence exist in any language: “We are living in very unimportant times”?

Now it does, I know, but before this moment, no one might have said it. People have always believed that they are living through monumental and transformative times. Every generation, even without enduring a pandemic, has an exaggerated reverence for the importance of its own epoch. That is why I do not fully believe the emerging idea that a virus has altered the world forever. The world after the pandemic will be highly recognizable, even “normal”.

There will be some minor changes, of course. The cultural dominance of the handshake will fade. The hug of acquaintances and foes will mercifully stop. The great clearing of the throat, which is often taken as a dialect of Malayalam, will not vanish but might attract more attention than before in public spaces. The mask, which was until recently only ubiquitous in East Asia, may sadly become a common urban feature across the world. The gorgeous will somehow continue to look gorgeous in a mask, but the more interesting features of the human face, like the unprovoked seriousness of strangers passing by, their mysterious sorrows and the comedy of noses especially, will be denied to me and others who are interested. Masks might even become mandatory in public transport systems, and anyone who sneezes in a Mumbai local train will face a thousand stares. And a new question will arise: If most of a city is going to be masked, what use are thousands of cameras? Should these devices turn more sophisticated to recognize a person behind a mask? Should people in public spaces be surveyed through their mobile phones?

Many behaviours that were once condemned in India as casteist have returned and may stay. The poor and the rich are both practising untouchability and misanthropic distancing, and they are washing with soap the memories of being in proximity of the other. Perhaps the way to end casteism in India was never trying to abolish some practices but to encourage everyone to practise them. Who would have thought that a day would come when sanitation workers are showered with flowers by a middle-class residential colony, and doctors asked to vacate? The realization that doctors are at high risk of infection may stay long after the epidemic is over. They might become a new social class,to be occasionally felicitated by the clanging of plates but who may find it harder to find homes.

A clever scholar may use these times to question, more convincingly than ever, whether caste was defamed by the colonial woke, whether the caste practices of ancient India were merely an after-effect of past epidemics in eras when castes were just professional guilds.

The entity that has emerged the strongest from the pandemic is the State, which has demonstrated that it can lock down a billion odd people if there is a moral reason.

But the pandemic will leave untouched the most important foundations of the world. It will not create a new class of the powerful or the rich. It will not create new heads of state, nor ruin old billionaires. In fact, the same politics that divided societies has created much of the divisive news emanating from the virus. In the US, because President Donald Trump has expressed his dislike for the idea of a lockdown and intellectuals have supported it, “right-wingers” have been exhorting others to congregate, celebrate, shake hands and hug, and open the economy. In India, it is the opposite. Prime Minister Narendra Modi asked Indians to stay indoors, and so the lockdown has the same timbre as patriotism, and intellectuals have been lamenting its effect on the poor.

Modi seems to have become more popular among his fans, with his fatherly appearances on television asking Indians to do stuff in unison, and those who were not given to his charm apparently remain uncharmed. Nothing has changed.

The pandemic reminds us of a fascinating political truth. Politicians can lose their popularity after instituting welfare programmes and building infrastructure like the metro system, but they can become more popular after putting people through hardship for a greater moral good, as in the aftermath of “demonetization” and now this lockdown.

However, India will squander this once-in-a-generation chance to clean itself up. Yet, this too is evidence that covid-19 will not transform us in significant ways.

And, the office will not die. This is largely because bosses are not bosses if they cannot see their subordinates. Also, what people once thought was freedom from office has shown itself to be an extreme sort of boredom in this lockdown. It is as if people have been condemned to domestic life. They will also travel extensively, and not always for excellent reasons.

Corona makes me wonder if it was some ancient pandemic that infected humans with monogamy. Even if that were so, our pandemic will change nothing about sleeping with strangers. Even at the height of the AIDS hysteria, sex with strangers did not diminish; it just became rubber-coated. There will be similar modifications.

And, God will not die. There will be huge religious gatherings and pilgrimages. And pubs will open; there will be concerts and vacations and great collective joys. Because everything that people do, they do because they have nothing better to do. That alone will return to us the world before corona.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’.





Our absurd notions of what’s essential and what’s not


2020-04-12

As the extraordinary lockdown of the nation continues, these are, according to India, Essential Things—maida , rice, sugar, milk, refined sunflower oils, bread, brown bread which is maida with a brown dye, and fruit juices which are sugar, chemicals and pulp. Not only can you live for decades without these “essentials”, you will be healthier, more beautiful and less likely to die in a pandemic if you avoid them.

One way or another, most essentials are a result of a planet-wide addiction to a drug called sugar. They are harmful, they are cheap as they are produced in large quantities because they are “essential” even when there is no pandemic, and every kilogram of most essential things requires hundreds of litres of fresh water. They represent the tyranny of a majority, like religion.

But then these foods, like religion, bring joy to millions. However, that is not the reason why they are classified as essentials. In a crisis, joy is not considered an essential thing. Being alive is. There is something absurd and meaningless about the concept of Essential Things. It is an idea that is filled with wrong assumptions.

The same absurd idea is at play in the treatment of that perennial global disease—poverty . There is an important assumption that India makes about what is “essential”—the notion that what the poor need is only food, and that their bellies have to be filled with starch and sugar. I am not disputing that cheap food is a basic necessity; I am disputing the idea that a basic necessity is the same as what is essential.

The extraordinary power of the idea that grain and sugar are sacred essentials for the poor has created an indestructible system, a private-public partnership that produces them cheap at an industrial scale, denying most of India the habit of healthier diet. The first sign of new prosperity for hundreds of millions of Indians is high blood sugar. The reason why vegetables, eggs and meat are not subsidized at the scale of grain and sugar is that proteins are not considered as essential as simple sugars.

Being alive is merely a platform, living is a very different matter, even for the poor, but the benevolent world does not accept that. Time and again, the poor have demonstrated that they value fun as much as survival. Except in extreme circumstances, like famine, the poor have disproved the favourite assumption of the rich that basics are a greater necessity than fun.

That the poor must be interested only in the grim business of “essentials” and that fun is a flippant thing is not a mistake that only the Indian government makes. Even the American tech industry was trapped by the nonsense of Essential Things. Every time tech billionaires thought of building a computer or phone for the poor, they imagined it will be used to check “the price of a crop”. Even Mark Zuckerberg imagined a special internet for the poor that contained only educational and informative sites that, of course, would have helped a poor farmer check the price of his crop. But then the reason why the poor adopted phones and the internet was the same as that of the rich—not to discuss diarrhoea, but to pursue fun.

The true nature of sorrow is boredom. That is why even in a transient phenomenon like the lockdown of a nation, boredom is not a trivial matter.

When I was younger, I believed that in a calamity, the only people who mattered were doctors, engineers and scientists. Even assuming, wrongly, that most books and films were not bad at all, I thought artists were the most useless in a calamity. I was, as you can see, trapped in the myth of essentials. Now I feel differently. I see all around me that what keeps people going, what makes them suffer greatly just to be alive in a crisis, and to follow draconian orders, is the promise of fun, which is largely a creation of artists.

It is amusing to note that today most of India is immersed in all sorts of films and series, our presumed inessentials, while hospitals, an essential service, are seeing fewer patients than normal because people are so terrified of corona, hospitals and doctors, that they are putting off medical procedures.

As I write this column, cops are enforcing a containment sealing of my colony in Gurugram, a commodious residential area of row houses, where there have been no covid cases. Weeks ago, there were two cases in a high-rise hundreds of metres away. I hear even walks and runs will be banned, even though the colony is so spacious that people in public spaces are usually separated by a hundred metres. In fact, to get closer than six feet to another, you have to hate or love them or simply want to be infected. No one is sure why the government is wasting its resources on sealing a somewhat sparsely populated colony with no history of the disease.

The world has responded to the pandemic in two ways—the Chinese way, which is the lockdown of an economy, and the more relaxed but cautious way of, say, Japan and Sweden, that lets life flow. India is imitating China, and has in the process become the world’s most stringent adopter of the lockdown method. In all of the Western world, except in stray pockets, people are actually encouraged to go out and exercise.

The office of the deputy commissioner of Gurugram reassured me that it will release a list of reasonable exceptions. I hope it does not share the ancient confusion in India about Essential Things. Anything that is fun, anything that brings happiness to people, we are trained to think is inessential.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





There is a reason the rest of India cannot be Kerala


2020-04-19

Every time I see Malayalee women, including my mother, hold their stomachs and laugh, I imagine that someone has told them that Kerala is a “matriarchal” society. That Kerala is “a matriarchal society” is nonsense to such a degree that I have stopped believing even elephants are “matriarchal”.

But many other exceptional qualities that Indians attribute to Kerala are true. Especially the way the state has fought the covid-19 pandemic, illuminating for the world outside its advanced and vast healthcare system for the masses.

If Kerala were a nation, it would be considered a proper middle-income one that is way more advanced than India. It has among the highest per capita incomes in South Asia, and its people probably have the best quality of life. An average farmer in Kerala is so prosperous that if he commits suicide, our charlatan activists will not claim, blindly as is their wont, that it was because of “debt”.

So there is this question that people are asking, and not for the first time: Why can’t the rest of India be more like Kerala?

Kerala does not offer urban fun and its men make drinking seem like a depressing disease, and it is one long densely populated village filled with villagers who tend to think like villagers. But it is a very clean place, the air here seems prehistoric, and every Malayalee appears to have abundant fresh water, a portion of which women often pour on their head every morning, and with their hair still wet, they go somewhere in a tearing rush, as though to meet a hairdryer. Even the cheapest restaurants have high hygiene standards, all of which must, by law and tradition, feed you an unlimited amount of rice.

Assured of food, Malayalees have such dignity and an overblown sense of their rights that they famously make it hell for industries to flourish in the state. In a year, Kerala loses 200 days to various types of “hartals” (strikes). Despite this, there is no art-film-grade poverty in Kerala; everyone has land and a home, and the swag of liberation. It seems impossible to find a Malayalee maid in Kerala. However, it is a different matter outside the state.

Malayalees thrive in any capitalistic society outside Kerala performing even menial tasks if the price is good. Some 35% of Kerala’s income is from remittances sent by 10% of its population that lives outside India. They are able to exploit capitalism the way, say, Biharis cannot because of Kerala’s focus on healthcare and primary education.

In their book An Uncertain Glory, the economists Jean Drèze and Amartya Sen argue that India only claimed it was a “socialist” country after independence; it never did two crucial things that most socialist nations did—invest in primary education and the health of its people. Kerala did. It was a true socialist republic within a confused republic.

Modern India has been trying to be more like Mumbai. It is raising congested cities out of villages, shrinking homes, building amoeba-shaped golf courses for a few and calling it progress. Instead, maybe India should try to be a Kerala?

It is a pointless ambition because our greatest myth is that a political system creates a society. The fact is that the character of people makes some political systems possible. Many times, the political system is an accident of history, or merely terminology. Like the Communist Party of India (Marxist), which has ruled Kerala intermittently for decades. It is hard to say in what way this party is communist.

There certainly was nothing “communist” about the people of Kerala. In the 80s, Eugene Koshy, who worked for a modest software training school, hit upon an unremarkable marketing idea that transformed the fortunes of his company—he promoted the institute with images of American flags and hamburgers. This is not how “a communist” society is expected to behave.

This is my theory of why Kerala is the way it is. For centuries, its ports were important nodes in global trade; as a result, some people prospered very much, the inequality of neighbours was excellent evangelism for the idea of wealth itself, and a whole society was intoxicated by entrepreneurship.

Also, as it happens to prosperous entrepôts, there was an assimilation of many cultures. It was a capitalistic society before such names were invented. As a result of the mercantile gold age, Christianity and Islam came to influence the state’s elites. So ownership of capital became confused, which is always a good sign.

After European trade came European conscience, which, like conscience today, was a mixture of two selfish forces—a way of assuaging the guilt of the rich, and a way to bleed your rival through idealism. For instance, freeing slaves is not only about freeing humans, it is also a way to hurt those who have a tactical advantage in owning slaves. A strong reformation movement took hold of Kerala even before independence, and the idea that the strong should take care of the weak grew, and from this emerged a generation of aristocratic, idealistic communist leaders who equated colonialism with capitalism.

Modern Kerala, which is misunderstood as a communist region, is in reality a post-capitalist state. A lot of things have gone into the making of its character. Mere policy cannot transform the rest of India into Kerala.

In any case, idealistic Kerala survives because the world outside Kerala is not Kerala.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Why some things scare people more than other things


2020-04-26

The way India has responded to the covid pandemic, it is as though the government cares deeply for us. India, it seems, does not want Indians to die.

This affection is confusing because India allows poisonous particles to float in the air, lets thousands die every year on its roads, and lets trains derail. Actually, India does not even shut the doors of most trains. India lets dangerous chemical godowns function where scores have been burnt alive. It allows so much filth and stagnant water that mosquitoes, snakes and pigs thrive in the heart of towns. People die after a feast; children perish after a free meal in schools.

Why is it that a nation that has very low standards for life and living has such high standards in its war against one disease? Yes, India is imitating nations that have very high standards of life for its people. Even so, it is doing a very good job of it.

India, like the rest of the globe, is in the grip of a very successful fear. Like people and startups, some fears succeed wildly while other fears, which are just as substantial, fail. What makes some fears succeed?

You may argue that an almost hysterical fright was evoked by covid-19 because it was the correct, scientific and moral reaction of an evolved world. Here are two of your most respectable arguments that justify the unprecedented shutdown of the global economy: Covid-19 is less deadly than other famous diseases like Sars, Mers, Ebola and Nipah, but the disease is easier to transmit and infects millions more and in that way is more deadly. And, swine flu, which is a recent version of the Spanish Flu, spreads faster than covid-19 but its fatality rate is low. Hence, an intense fear of covid is justified.

This is not a very convincing argument, though.

Imagine if someone in January had told you that an infectious disease has broken out and that it would infect one billion people and kill over half a million. What would you want your government to do? Will you say, “Ah, the fatality rate is less than 0.1%”? Or will you say that half a million deaths are unacceptable, let us shut down the economy for several weeks?

The disease I am referring to is swine flu, which spread across the world in 2009 and 2010 infecting one billion and killing half a million, according to estimates. Yet, the world did not shut down in 2009 or 2010, even though the prognosis was grim then. What made the world react differently to two different prospects of mass global deaths?

To understand successful fears, it is useful to understand failed fears. This is because it is hard to see the mechanism of success, as triumph is shrouded in an illusory web of respectability and learned opinions. A failed fear, on the other hand, is naked. For instance, the fear that mobile technology may cause cancer.

In the early 1980s, a set of powerful activists could have killed mobile technology, but, fortunately for us, they were then preoccupied by a snazzier technology—biotech. They would eventually manage to defame genetically modified organisms (GMOs) for decades and build a highly successful fear around it.

In his book, Seeds Of Science, Mark Lynas, a former anti-GMO activist himself, reveals how the fear of biotech was manufactured. There is a moment in the book when he says of a powerful anti-GMO activist, Jim Thomas, “…(although) he did have concerns about mobile phones too, it is undeniable that communications technologies are not nearly as emotionally charged as food and farming”.

If activists back then could see the potential of mobile phones, this is what may have happened: Their rejection of monopolistic tech might have inspired them to highlight scientific mutterings over how radiation from mobile phones may cause cancer. That is all they may have needed to ensure that mobile phones, as we know them, never came to be.

What is behind a successful fear is the same as what is behind all kinds of success—chance, which is our vague word for a complex set of numerous anonymous events. But there are some broad knowable factors at work in the success of fears, as in the case of GMOs or Aadhaar. For instance, the support of influential people who have an ideological interest in the transmission of a fear.

In my view, this is how the fear of covid-19 spread: China discovered the disease and did something very Chinese. It shut down a large portion of the nation because it also had control over switching on what it had switched off. American tech billionaires came next. Many of these billionaires have two qualities that are good conductors of fear—they seem more afraid of death than others, and they appear to constantly anticipate their own destruction in the rise of sentient machines or diseases. Also, they have deep respect for China, which manufactures their goods. Some of them, especially those who did not make physical goods, called for the US to imitate China and lock itself down. They transmitted their panic to a few influential journalists who were wondering what their own opinions were on the matter when leaders such as US President Donald Trump and British Prime Minister Boris Johnson expressed contempt for the idea of a lockdown. This set in motion a powerful Western humanitarian reaction in favour of a lockdown.

Meanwhile, as a triumphant fear still reigns over the world, Indians go on living in a perilous country, and dying on the roads, in trains, after feasts and in factories. But wearing masks.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





How wrong we are about actors is what makes them great


2020-05-03

A father cries at his son’s funeral. A man interrupts him, and asks if he can cry louder, or quieter, say a word that is poignant maybe. The actor attempts some variations. He has never been in this situation in his real life. An unsung feature of all art, even though it defines the very quality of an artist, is the element of conjecture — how an artist guesses an experience he has never experienced, or even cares about. But more consciously than other kinds of artists, an actor projects a farce that other people then absorb as a deep emotion. That is the actor’s job. Not only to be understood, but also to be somewhat misunderstood.

As the nation mourns the death of two beloved actors, Irrfan Khan and Rishi Kapoor, who died last week, we see a quality in the tributes—the homage is often more about the person paying the tribute than the men who died. How they made the mourner feel, how old the mourner was when that film released, what the mourner was going through when she saw that memorable scene. You can argue there is a bit of this in every tribute because people are full of themselves, but this level of self-absorption tends to appear in public obituaries only when an actor dies.

At the heart of the special relationship between successful actors and people is the fact that people see more in actors than the actors themselves wish to display. In essence, an actor succeeds when people develop wrong ideas about him.

People associate acting with faces, but the finest actors are primarily great speakers, usually in one language. Acting itself, I believe, is not making faces, but speaking. As we saw in Irrfan, especially, who had power over us when he spoke in Hindi and was merely efficient or even farcical in English films. An absurd thing Hollywood does is hire the finest Indian actors only to make them speak in an unnatural way in English. It is almost like hiring a great cricketer to play baseball.

Yes, there was Charlie Chaplin. But wasn’t he more dance and choreography than acting? Millions of Tamilians will point to Kamal Haasan’s Pesum Padam, a silent film ahead of its time. But then, bereft of words, most actors in the film, except some extras, could stand up to the great Kamal Haasan.

What about silences, you may say? Haven’t we all read about the masterful silences of great actors. But then, if directors reveal the history of many silent facial expressions, we will probably be baffled. Some great menacing faces of an actor may have been of a moment when he was just sitting around after a take, waiting for his cup of chai.

The talent of an actor is in the ambiguity of his personality, in being the way he is for the world to deduce a million wrong meanings.

This phenomenon is even more powerful in actors who are not considered actors. Most successful politicians, for instance. I don’t mean to say they are tricksters. When we use the word “acting” outside the art of acting, we usually mean it as some kind of a devious trick. But tricks themselves are low forms of deviousness, and far more inefficient than tricksters imagine. Powerful politicians, activists, gurus, writers, singers do exactly what good actors do—they unknowingly radiate a broad ambiguous idea and then millions of people see whatever they wish to see.

In many aspects of life, the more clear a person is, the less successful he will be because clarity is the end of a story. Ambiguity, on the other hand, is the start of one.

M.G. Ramachandran, who could never make as many faces as his great rival Sivaji Ganesan, and who could never pass the final test of a great Tamil actor—which is the ability to laugh and cry at the same time—was a much bigger star than all his contemporaries. Something in this Malayalee born in Sri Lanka made millions of poor Tamilians misunderstand him as one of them and their saviour. It is not something one achieves through a mere trick. It takes a physical body that captures circumstance and a vast collective illusion. It takes an actor.

Years after the reign of M.G.R., Rajinikanth, a Marathi-speaker born in Karnataka would hold a similar sway in Tamil Nadu over the more expressive Kamal Haasan.

A quality that many great actors—probably all professional actors—possess that is not celebrated enough is their ability to permit moments of debasement on screen.

Once, when I was interviewing Aamir Khan, a photographer asked him if he would make some faces for the camera—a wide range of human emotions. It seemed like a good idea, until Khan dismissed it with a degree of silent contempt. Years later, I witnessed a similar moment when several members of an audience begged the actor Nawazuddin Siddiqui, on stage, to repeat a famous dialogue from a film. He refused. Without the context of a cinematic scene, the two men found it undignified to indulge in a farce. Yet, when there is context, an actor will go to great lengths to diminish himself—like displaying nudity or performing sexual acts or other things that are not glorious.

Any other person performing those things in public would be perceived as debasing himself. But an actor survives that; he is even rewarded for taking the risk. And he is celebrated. And wherever he goes, he is chased by people.

What a strange thing stature is—people grant it grudgingly and they are then in awe of what they themselves gave.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Why India should treat its poor as though they are rich


2020-05-10

All Indians are poverty-alleviation experts; their need to depute the task to the right authorities is often what their tweets, evening chats and morning walks are all about. India is obsessed with poverty. Most of our policies are about the eradication of poverty; most of our funds are dedicated to the poor. That Indians are still poor is not the perplexing element in this—there will always be the poor as long as there are the rich, and India’s poor are way better today than the abject poor of our childhood. What is perplexing is the way India treats its poor. This has not changed.

Irrespective of whether you are a freelance humanitarian or a freelance patriot, a fact that is beyond dispute is that the country treats its poor very badly.

Across India, in the name of fighting a pandemic, India has beaten up its poor, denied them their livelihood, made them run behind trucks for food, and forced thousands of families to walk hundreds of kilometres to their villages, letting some people die on the way. A few days ago, more than a dozen men travelled inside a cement mixer to escape detection. You may say, or you may not say but discreetly believe, given the logician that you are, that poverty has rough consequences, so what is the surprise? But then, even if we adjust for the misfortunes of poverty, India tends to treat its poor with a degree of cruelty that economics and practicality do not justify. This is unnecessary.

How then can India treat its poor better?

The problem is that India treats its poor like they are poor. This is our central flaw. When India says all Indians are equal, the country is not entirely being economical with the truth. The trouble is that India treats all Indians as though they are poor.

The poor, usually, have very low standards for themselves. Most visuals emanating from covid stories are actually not very shocking for the poor. Even in peace time, the poor do walk extraordinary distances in the sun, carrying heavy objects and other humans, if they don’t have a choice. Even in peace time, they run behind stray buses and travel inside cement mixers. A vulgar truth of life is that most of what appears to be misery to us is not so miserable to the immiserated.

These low standards for life and living, while practical, are useless for a country like India that is on course to be a much better place. The way forward is not to let the poor set standards for themselves and the nation. India must set a very high bar for the living standards of the poor.

As a reporter, I used to frequently encounter an attitude that concerned air-conditioning. Not about it being a luxury—which it was and still is. But that the poor do not “deserve” air-conditioning. Not only because they will not pay for it, but also because they do not expect to be so well treated.

At the heart of the good that Indians try to do—not only through policy but also through pious activism—there is this unspoken sense that low standards “will do” for the poor. India’s very definition of comfort is a state of being that is inaccessible to the poor. Often, we pay not for the quality of service, experience, home or education, but for keeping the poor out.

Low standards for the poor are embedded in all the cures that India prescribes for poverty. It begins in the faulty middle-class academic conjecture of what the poor want. There is this overrating of food, a certain cultural oversensitivity to the act of eating. It is not a surprise that the moment there is a crisis, the government announces that every poor person will get two bags of starch.

The poor themselves have been demonstrating standards of living that are somewhat higher. The poor routinely reject the low-quality schools that many state governments build for their poor, and instead splurge on superior schools. Many long-distance walkers of the pandemic, for instance, dragged suitcases with wheels. I am not saying suitcases with wheels are a sign of new wealth, but they represent a visual of poverty that is very different from governmental and journalistic projections.

People who are not poor are constantly guessing what being poor might be like. And the poor play along, trying to guess the right things they must say to satisfy those who ask.

The problem with conjecture is that it is a talent; to guess a whole experience you have never endured is a talent, and most people do not have this intuition. As a result, they have wrong perceptions of poverty, and they keep lowering standards for the poor to such levels that they unknowingly start treating the poor like some other species. For instance, the notion that what the poor need is food, food and more food.

Here is a suggestion. India should instead treat its poor as though they form the country’s upper middle class. This might seem ludicrous at first glance, but when we come down to what it would imply, the idea is much simpler to comprehend.

For a start, the police should not hit the poor at will. Cops don’t hit you, as you could testify, so we know that this is possible. Also, don’t make schools for them that are useless; nor hospitals that are filthy. Kerala and the Delhi government have demonstrated that this is also possible. Give them expansive playgrounds and nature and beauty. Many of them grew up in exquisite places, after all. And let them travel in great comfort. The Delhi Metro, and the metro systems of many other cities, have shown that this, too, is possible. And that if you treat the poor well, the poor will follow all the rules. It is in the nature of the poor to love the government.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Dear Aarogya Setu, use me well and help me trust you


2020-05-17

What do you call surveillance when it is used for a good cause? Surveillance. But then you don’t like that word, so it is now called “tracking”, or even better, “tracing”. In time, these words too will acquire infamy, just like how the various innocuous, and even celebratory, words for Dalits are condemned in time.

A few days ago, the Indian government released a tracking app called Aarogya Setu that will help you identify how far you are from a person who has acquired covid. You diagnose yourself by truthfully answering some easy questions and let the app spot your live location.

One strand of response was predictable the moment the app emerged—there was hysteria over something broadly and loosely called “privacy”. Rahul Gandhi, for some reason, employed alliteration when he called it a “sophisticated surveillance system”. He did not realize he was, in reality, praising the app because its whole point is to track or trace, or surveil the live locations of millions of Indians. Across the world, governments released similar apps. Israel used an anti-terror surveillance tool to trace the movements of civilians. Britain said it will modify a proper surveillance app to make it more palatable for its people. In reality, what it modified was the language used to describe the app. More “tracing” than “surveillance”.

Among the most successfully transmitted fears of our age is the idea that our information, however banal, useless and freely available it might be, can be misused by some shady entity, usually the government or a corporation. It’s an ancient fear that was evident even during the early days of census collection in Britain.

Our pandemic has confused many proponents of this paranoia because the way mobile data has been used to fight covid-19 has emphasized the truth that the private information of a huge number of people is a public resource.

Today, an average human radiates information. Some scientists say thousands of meaningful data points can emanate from a single person going somewhere with his mobile phone. Millions of people, taken together, radiate an extraordinary number of behavioural patterns. We are both individuals and units in a crowd, both beings and a species. We have faces, but we are also faceless. We have rights as a face, we have duties as the faceless.

Most collective data of people going about their lives is faceless, innocuous, anonymous and this information is immensely useful for those who wish to provide services—like governments and corporations. Google Maps, for instance, knows so much about traffic and the best routes because it knows exactly where millions of people are.

Not everyone is comfortable with all this. Some speak in terms of liberty, which they confuse with “freedom”. (Liberty is restricted freedom granted by a society, an individual freedom that is subordinate to collective rights and duties.) This lot is unable to perceive its own megalomanic self-absorption, which it couches as idealism. There are others who have a more reasonable concern—that access to such information can be misused to identify an individual; or that lazy software could get hacked.

Some scientists believe that there is no such thing as anonymous data. Two years ago, a group of researchers studied two sets of anonymized information of people in Singapore—phone logs and location stamps in its metro transit system. By overlapping these two sets, they could isolate data that aligned almost perfectly, thereby unmasking a person, his location and journeys.

These are not trivial concerns. And governments and corporations recognize that in their self-interest, they must invest a lot in guarding privacy, or they will lose the cooperation of people. There is still much that powerful politicians and political parties need to realize. A strongman image may have many benefits, for example, but it is harder for such a leader to sell the idea of innocuous data to his people.

Even so, there is a villainous quality to the persistent whines about privacy orchestrated by bleak, paranoid activists. They have successfully defamed the idea of collective data as a common good. In fact, it took an extraordinary pandemic to bring tracking back into mainstream respectability.

Two recent stories in the The New York Times trace the emotional shift. As recently as in January this year, the newspaper ran an opinion piece that argued, “Surveillance capitalists control the science and the scientists, the secrets and the truth.” Writers and reporters for the paper will continue to make such arguments, but what is interesting is that towards the end of March, it carried a feature that explained, using mobile phone data of air travellers, how the virus got out of China. “We analysed the movements of hundreds of millions of people,” the paper said without any trace of righteous indignation at itself for using mobile phone records to unmask a strand of truth.

“Privacy” is a potent word. It draws its power from our perception that we are the centre of our universe. People who see the greater common good in the collation and public use of community data should invent a new word to counter the potency of “privacy”, a word that conveys that we are not individuals all the time, or deserve to be filled with the self-importance of our petty lives. A word that will remind us that we are also a part of the herd, that we are also simply data. I propose the word “humility”.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Why India’s melodrama over walking migrants is good


2020-05-24

You may find it hard to believe now, but it was patriots who started and transmitted the lament over the plight of “the migrant”. Fans of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) triggered it on 28 and 29 March, when a large number of migrant labourers appeared to leak out of Delhi’s quarantine and began to move like a pall of human gloom towards Uttar Pradesh. They were then chiefly men, walking with their bags. The middle-class lament began on social media, and other media strongholds of the BJP, to make the Aam Aadmi Party government of Delhi look incompetent.

There are bits of circumstantial evidence that point to the political origins of “the migrant crisis”. One is the spread of the spurious news on 28 March that Delhi’s AAP government had cut electricity supply to migrants, and that state government buses were ferrying labourers to a bus station to get rid of them.

If you key in the terms “migrant crisis” or “migrants walking” on Google’s search analytics site, Google Trends, you will see that searches in India for these terms spiked around the time those migrants leaked out of Delhi. Google Trends analysis is usually a good indicator of how a news cycle, or some form of community hysteria, begins.

The transmission of the political lament over “the poor migrant” appears to have backfired on its originators.

The “migrant” in India always did mean the poor labourer. Even egalitarian jazz-lovers in places like Bombay referred to themselves as “cosmopolitans”, and when they used the word “migrants”, they meant the provincial rustics who had come from north Indian states. Even so, today, “migrant’, is entrenched in the middle-class conscience as a poor labourer–a victim, to many, of the covid-response of the BJP-led government.

Conscientious Indians have reacted strongly to ‘the migrant crisis’. The news of poor people walking many miles back home, even though demonstrating that they can now afford suitcases with wheels, disturbed humanitarians. The news of Indians dying while walking broke hearts. They framed all such news as consequences of Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s response to the pandemic. When people were run over by trains; when they died in road accidents, they became “migrants” killed by the “apathy” of the government. Even the visual of a mentally disturbed man eating a raw dog on the road became a story about a “migrant eating a dog because of Indian government”.

The same phenomenon has taken hold of the ongoing cyclone calamity. A man who appeared mentally unstable took shelter from the rains in a trash dump; journalists captured his images and called it the plight of the poor.

Suddenly, Indian journalism and its readership seem filled with Prince Siddharths who have just discovered there is poverty in India. And this is excellent.

It is a sign that a new generation or a new society is not comfortable with low standards for life; that it will overreact in horror to things that did not surprise their parents.

What does calm objectivity on poverty signify? What is the meaning of any analysis that shows, correctly, that the poor were poor even before covid, that terrible things happened to them, and they sometimes did terrible things themselves? Of what use is objectivity in the war against a catastrophe like extreme poverty?

Yes, maybe the humanitarian response to the plight of “the migrant” was born of political malice against the BJP. Yes, there are charlatans among the posh young and they are naive to think that a man eating from a garbage can is a new phenomenon, or that a poor man, in his right senses, will never eat a dog raw in the middle of a road. Yes, people are seeking meaning to their pointless lives in social lament. Yet, all these are crucial steps in the process of eradicating extreme poverty. All advanced societies have gone through this process that involves beautiful people parading their goodness. The pursuit of the rich to fill their empty souls with meaning is at the heart of all reformation movements.

I have no doubt that the honest selfishness of material greed is the most efficient way of eliminating poverty, but it takes too long, like evolution. The time unit of economics has to be the span of a childhood. What morals and naive humanitarian lament contribute to society is the speed of poverty eradication.

Even the political origin of the “migrant” issue in the final days of March points to something good. It is a sign that the central preoccupation of Indian politics remains its war against poverty.

You may argue all this has been going on for decades—those rich people with hearts, their bad poems of anguish, those beautiful but suicidal youth in non-profits, those politicians who claim they will end poverty. But that is the point. Their charades were not all useless. Capitalism may have had an outsized and unsung contribution to enriching us, but without the overarching principle that the very purpose of the lucky is to care for the unlucky, very few would have been enriched by capitalism and most of the new middle classes may not have formed.

What is different today from the previous generation is that laments of conscience travel much faster and wider, and they have far greater political power than before.

In a world where people do not have the mental capacity to be objective about anything, in the age of hysteria, what is so bad about deploying hyperbole to lament the many old ways in which the poor die?

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Mark Zuckerberg might be mostly right about Twitter


2020-05-31

Last week, Donald Trump was right about something. In fact, the American president was right more than once. And Twitter made one gigantic mistake.

This is what happened. Around the time Trump was tweeting a discredited conspiracy theory about the death of a woman, and her family was begging Twitter to remove the tweets, which it declined citing free speech, the social media giant did something extraordinary. It flagged two of the president’s tweets that were far less spurious but concerned what the social media outfit seems to think is our most sacred idea—elections.

The two tweets expressed Trump’s contempt for postal voting in the impending presidential elections this year. Voting by mail is permitted in the US, but its use is limited to a few voters. In the light of our pandemic, there is now a plan to significantly expand its scope, allowing millions to vote without visiting polling stations.

Trump tweeted: “There is NO WAY (ZERO!) that Mail-In Ballots will be anything less than substantially fraudulent. Mail boxes will be robbed, ballots will be forged & even illegally printed out & fraudulently signed…” This tweet and a following one on the subject were flagged by Twitter in a line that said, “Get the facts about mail-in ballots”, a sanctimonious intervention that led to a small paragraph with the headline, “Trump makes unsubstantiated claim that mail-in ballots will lead to voter fraud”.

Defending this extraordinary move, Twitter’s chief executive officer Jack Dorsey said, “We’ll continue to point out incorrect or disputed information about elections globally…”

But, despite the fact that the ‘NO WAY’ bit in his tweet was hyperbole, Trump was not entirely wrong. The New York Times, in 2012, had reported there was “error and fraud” in postal ballots. Hours after the flagging of Trump, a columnist for the Washington Post, Marc A. Thiessen, argued in defence of Trump’s observations: “No one questions that mail-in ballots have much higher rates of not being counted.”

Mark Zuckerberg, the co-founder of Facebook, said that social media platforms should not be “the arbiter of truth”. He is right for some simple and complex reasons.

If Twitter, a private corporation, is going to decide what is true and what is free speech, what happens if tomorrow a Chinese company buys out Twitter? Assume the Chinese government has a huge known or secret stake in that Chinese company. Will China then decide what is free speech and what statements by heads of states it will flag? Will the same group of people who support Dorsey’s fact-checking of Trump today oppose a Chinese billionaire’s fact-checking of Zoe Saldana tomorrow (my future Democratic presidential candidate)?

Also, how does Twitter know what exactly is a fact, or even what is the truth, which are two different things? Even in the simple case of postal ballots, where the substance of Trump’s claim has support in the “respectable media”, Twitter got its reaction wrong.

Also, the view that people want to consume truth, that they flock to social media for the truth, or that they should consume truth alone, is too simple a view of human beings. Most ideas are ambiguous and their transmission and content are usually determined by politics. The transformative power of fake news itself is political fake news. Fake news does not make a strong man more successful than he already is. Rather, a piece of fake news becomes successful because it is about a highly popular man and tells a story that millions want to believe. This is why Trump is more popular than boiled beetroot.

Enraged by Twitter’s bias, Trump has set out to dismantle a thin piece of legislation that ensures social media platforms are not held accountable for their user content. On Thursday, he signed an executive order that threatened to legally turn social media platforms into regular publishers.

Yet, it is not as though Twitter’s Dorsey has no defence at all. If you are the head of Twitter, and you consider yourself a sane and good person, and you wield this enormous power to transmit news to hundreds of millions and shape the truths of your time, would you think it is morally right to have no control at all over the transmission? Insanity and evil are good conductors of news and emotions. Wouldn’t you then pick a flawed but less dangerous side and intervene in the power of your own product—for a good cause?

Apple is many great capitalist things, but isn’t it also Steve Jobs’ emotional point of view? Isn’t Tesla, too, a point of view? Aren’t all points of views political in some form? Why shouldn’t Twitter then have a view that will perform its ultimate task as a profit-oriented corporation—attract or repel consumers? Twitter says it is ready to face the consequences, like all good companies do.

Our age is a highly democratic one, and the evidence is in a maligned phenomenon called “polarization”. As this column has argued, the defamation of polarization is the parting curse delivered by those who have lost control over the transmission of ideas. The way we have turned out, we now marvel at a time when religious patriots and asparagus-eaters, the Republicans and Democrats, used to read the same newspapers and watch the same news channels. One day, we will marvel at the fact that they used to rant on the same social media sites.

The lure of the network effect is not enough to justify the monopolies of present-day social media platforms in a world that wishes to be two sulking hemispheres.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





What we learn by looking at poverty as a pandemic


2020-06-07

It is not exactly poetic to say that poverty is a pandemic. In fact, it is almost a dull journalistic fact. Poverty, after all, shares some important characteristics with a global disease. Especially extreme poverty. You may argue that its victims do not transmit it beyond their own family, but it is hard to dispute that poverty is transmitted. Not only transmitted, it is transmitted across national boundaries. It has asymptomatic carriers.

Before we get entrapped in finding the correct analogies to substantiate a metaphor, let us settle on the most disturbing aspect of the poverty pandemic. It is a feature revealed by the world’s response to the more proper pandemic, covid-19. The governments, moral institutions and public figures that have responded to covid, largely in a chaotic way, are the same people, systems and platforms that are entrusted with the task of fighting poverty. So what covid may have given us is an insight into why the world has failed to cure extreme poverty, our most persistent pandemic.

Extreme poverty is different from that more philosophical matter, relative poverty. Most of us are poor compared to a billionaire, yet, all things considered, we have a better quality of life than the monarchs of the distant past. But then, most ordinary subjects of those monarchs probably had a better quality of life than the millions of Indians and Africans in absolute poverty today.

We can explain the modern origins of extreme poverty without taking a moral high ground, without identifying villains, or claiming that we are morally superior to politicians and industrialists. Let us consider the most interesting aspects of our failed moral war against extreme poverty—good intentions, imitation of foreign solutions, people who are not poor making guesses about what poverty might be, a political grouse masquerading as an intellectual argument, and scholarly but wrong analyses. These same factors were at play in the world’s battle against covid.

Which of the two phenomena that emerged from China last year is worse: a) Covid, or b) The concept of a complete lockdown of a whole nation? We know by now that the answer will differ according to the political bias of the person considering the question. But despite that being so, there is no ambiguity about a few things anymore.

When China enforced a lockdown of a vast section of its territory, it appeared to know what it was doing. It had past experience in responding to a highly infectious disease, and had control over the crucial forces that are required to enforce the lockdown as well as hide bad news. Also, it appeared to not only have command of the switch that shut a vast swathe of its economy, but also of its restart button.

Several democracies, including India, imitated China to varying degrees, but without such efficacy. Instead, they had a free press and a public that is accustomed to vast freedoms. As a result, a feeling of chaos and oppression engulfed these places, worsening a situation that was already bad.

This is similar to how India has fought poverty. An idea comes from elsewhere, transmitted by a powerful group of scholars, journalists and businesses who have their own emotional and practical reasons to back an idea. Indians who have influence over policy are then quickly colonized.

The way modern intellectuals speak of an idea they love is by making it look as though there is only one way of doing the right thing. The singularity of correctness makes sense in morality. That there is only one way of doing something right gives clarity to the moral. But war against disease and poverty requires greater ambiguity. As some nations have demonstrated, there might be many right ways, and a society has to choose the path that is best suited to its culture. In its response to covid, I believe that the Indian government wished to do the right thing, but what use is the right thing if it is done badly?

Some nations, like Japan and Sweden, went against the full force of mainstream global intellectual opinion, which had a near theological reverence for a complete lockdown. Those nations instead listened to their own local experts, initially facing the ire and insults of academics and the media that had contempt for anyone who appeared to care too much for the economy. There was even a stigma of indecency attached to equating the second-order effects of an economic collapse to the second-order effects of a pandemic’s spread.

Poverty persists for similar reasons. There is something vicious about the battle for ideas. Politicians, even when they wish to do the right thing, are tripped by intellectual lobbies. As in the battle against covid, in its battle against poverty, India has imitated foreign solutions that do not work here, and treated its own cultural instincts as inferior to Western ideas.

I do believe that most influential politicians across the political spectrum really did care about saving lives. They cared for practical, professional reasons, for humane reasons and even for supernatural reasons because they did not want the curse of human deaths on them. But as we know from our history of failed poverty alleviation, good intentions are useless without a plan, wisdom and execution.

The war against covid and the longer, less urgent war against poverty are defined and influenced by one other common factor: Nobody has a clue what to do, the loudest voice wins, and the loudest voice is loud because it has a moral timbre while the more practical and effective way doesn’t.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





It’s clear that people miss having other people around


2020-06-14

People have been missing people. Not just remote lovers, friends, siblings and parents, but they are missing what we usually mean when we say “people”—those strangers who make up the hum and the din and the whole backdrop of life. The extras in the gripping story about us, who murmured in cafes as we spoke to someone more important, and whose bodies and laughter we needed in a movie hall, but whom we despised for the long queue for popcorn, and for the traffic on the road, for crowding trains, filthy loos, and for their weddings, for blocking hotel reservations, raising airfares and ruining our air, and whom we wished to kill before birth through pious population control policies.

The government has backed off a bit from our lives, chiefly because it is unable to pretend that it knows what it is doing, and now we can go almost anywhere we want. But we are still cautious. Death by covid is a bit like cancer—people covertly blame you for it. So we are not fully back yet to the way we were before. As a result, we are not there for the strangers, as their backdrops in cafes, just as they too have vanished from ours.

In the exquisite TV series Fleabag, Fleabag tells an older woman that most people, “are shit”. And the older woman says the most beautiful thing: “People are all we’ve got.”

And that is what the pandemic has reminded us. People are all we have got. Including the secret lovers of tyrants and the sanctimonious charlatans. They are the energy we feed off. When we sustained our longest lie—that we love diversity, not only in forests but also in humans—what we originally meant was that we want diversity in the extras who make up the backdrop of our stories, for aesthetic reasons, so long as the diversity was not too glaring.

As great cities emptied out for our pandemic, we at first enjoyed the gaping emptiness and silence. People across the world celebrated images of animals taking over roads; even Indians pretended it was something unusual. And images of dolphins in urban waters with spurious captions became popular. But soon we could see the gloom in the emptiness. Peace, yes, but who would have thought peace would be so melancholic? The bleak can marinate in the calm and stillness for weeks, but most people find happiness in the buzz of activity. If I may paraphrase a timeless lament of an anonymous lover: We are miserable without people, it is almost like having them around.

Indians are more attuned to the energy of the crowd. It’s not only because of our massive population. Congestion is often a consequence of poor infrastructure. That is why we resent the crowd. Not the monoculture of a concert crowd, or a theatre crowd, but of the crush of poor desperate humans everywhere else.

Yet, when we used to visit advanced countries, after the first few days of appreciation, something in us died when we saw their hollow exquisite towns. The act of driving miles without seeing any human makes many Indians feel they are at the start of a bad apocalypse movie. And we get unsettled not only by their highways, but also towns.

I remember when I first visited Edinburgh, I wondered if there had been some calamity—where were the people? The city was a cluster of beautiful buildings, but where were the people? Where were the extras to fill desolate beautiful lanes and cafes?

When those extras visit India for the first time, especially Mumbai, they, too, might think there has been a calamity—they have never seen so many people, and people in Mumbai going about life resemble people fleeing a natural calamity.

When I was in my 20s, I used to be suspicious of the kind of people who said, “I love books” or “I love films”. They behaved as though all books and films were the same, a single collective organism, even though they can surely like only a small fraction of them. But now I get that what those lovers of books and films were marvelling at was the crowd of stories, the extras that form a backdrop. People say, “I love books” or “I love films” because they are too proud to say, “I love people”.

It is for all these reasons that I feel the talk about work-from-home and how the office will never return to its old power is a bit of nonsense. People are behaving as though internet conferencing was invented this month. The technology to turn the office obsolete has been around for years. But the office has survived for a good reason.

Work is mostly about companionship. Also, as a Silicon Valley guru pointed out recently, people are able to work well through video conferencing only because they have already built social connections in the real world.

A few years ago, a man came up with a drink called Soylent, which was a powder that had all the nutrients a body needed. You mix it with water and drink it. It is probably a more complete meal than conventional food. People who sampled it, who replaced regular meals with Soylent encountered a few problems. The most severe was not its taste. It was time.

They suddenly had too much time on their hands. We forget what eating is actually about—it is about people. From reading about food, talking about it, foraging for it in markets and cooking to the actual act of consumption, food is not really about eating, just as religion is not quite about God. In the same way, work is not about work.

Everything we do is about people—only the excuse changes.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





The appropriate way to feel low in a nation of miseries


2020-06-21

The balcony people have been feeling low. It is not quite grief, but close. It is a half-gloom, they may say, though they do not know what the other half is. Death is in the air, the future is bleak, there is no holiday resort to escape to, their old ways are on hold, and cash cannot make all this go away. An actor with real black hair has killed himself, and in the middle of all this, China is menacing. Yet, India’s half-rich and the rich cannot freely express their despair the way the affluent in other nations can.

India’s threshold for misery is very high. Even in this golden age of self-absorption, you feel it is somewhat indecent to lament your half-gloom without a deep sociological or medical reason. By Indian standards, melancholy is a trivial problem, especially when caused by a pandemic. After all, here people starve, wail, walk hundreds of kilometres like prehistoric migrants out of Africa.

Yet, the fact is, sorrow need not always have grand reasons. It usually does not.

In a nation that never had any street joy or beauty in public spaces, all that the affluent had was a way of life in their island republic within a republic where they paid a premium to keep other Indians and reality out. Now even that respite is on hold. So, they say, they feel a deep growing sadness of the times within, but are also forced to quickly add, to save themselves from ridicule, that yes they are lucky, they have everything, it must be their fault; if they cannot breathe, it must be their fault because they cannot claim there is a knee on their neck.

Indians have always struggled to understand melancholy that does not have an earth-shaking reason.

Until recent times, Indians told each other that the rich were unhappy. They said it with a touch of jubilation. And the rich were other people, who went in cars. In more than one Malayalam film, the upscale woman wore a sleeveless blouse, smoked, and stared long at sleeping pills on her palm at night. We didn’t know the origins of her grief; she was this way at the start of the film. We were expected to understand that her problem was the state of being a rich urban woman. The sleeping pill of the 80s became, in the 90s, Art of Living classes and the philosophies of J Krishnamurthy.

As Indians prospered and the middle classes behaved more like the rich than the poor, they grew more sympathetic to the reasonless sorrow. It did not feel flippant anymore or fleeting, as melancholy never makes its host feel it is transient; rather, it portends a long tropical marriage.

The new Indians of the 90s wondered if it was all their fault. In their quest to understand their reasonless sadness, they wondered if it was some yawning emptiness within. But can any human being really be empty? We are filled with so much love and hope and fundas and misconceptions. There is a whole festival going on inside us.

In their pursuit of grand reasons for their sorrow, India’s affluent often find the wrong grand reasons—like spouses, parents, capitalism and caste. The fact is many widely-accepted reasons for melancholy are modest. Like insect bites, gut bacteria, bad food, sloth, and misunderstanding mad men as philosophers. But the most underrated cause of contemporary urban sorrow is boredom. I believe that every five years or so, we die within and become zombies, and we have to do something extraordinary to rise from the undead. (Some people have babies.)

The Indian requirement of grand reasons for sorrow also makes the rich perform their most cruel act—attributing wrong causes to the deep grief of the poor, thus farming the sorrow of the poor for politics. As a result of this phenomenon, there are demographic fables like “farmer suicides” that make the balcony people rush to villages and hand out cheap clothes to “the hands that feed us”, while what the poor are actually crying out for is what most Indians secretly consider a luxury, like air-conditioning—an end to inexplicable innate melancholy.

A few days ago, Sushant Singh Rajput, an actor in his early thirties, was reported to have taken his own life. I wonder if he ever wore a mask in the pandemic. Surely he did, like the rest of us who wished to live. But then, the option of an early death was probably weighing on him for long, too. As he was a successful and famous young man, he was granted the broad reason “depression”. He did not qualify for other gigantic sociological reasons. Even so, in the days that followed his death, people tried to manufacture some worthy causes, like discrimination by powerful members of the film industry. What Rajput’s death should instead convey to Indians is that highly-pursued sources of joy, like success, fame and money, cannot overcome the disease of melancholy.

The actor’s death also conveys a message to those who are not clinically depressed, who are only mildly melancholic – in effect, most people. That in this world, everyone feels like a failure. At every rung, there is a better rung, there is humiliation and dejection. Barring a dozen odd people in this world, everyone else is probably oppressed; might even be lost without an oppressor. Even billionaires, who cannot be oppressed by mere humans, manufacture an excessive fear of disease, artificial intelligence and sentient machines.

What we possess will not keep us happy for long. Happiness is the illusion of change, or progression—of zombies rising from the dead every now and then.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





India’s search for a role model after America’s decline


2020-06-28

In the end, if everything works out well, if the theories of economists and other scholars actually turn out to be correct, every nation will become New Zealand. That’s all there is to strife.

Where is any nation headed? What is the meaning of all the debates, speeches, elections, “institutions”, fundas, activism, tweets and columns? The prophecy of New Zealand. What happens to a society after capitalism works out very well? New Zealand. Maybe with slightly broader roads and cycle lanes. If you have never been there, just imagine your idea of a government-run paradise, and add cops and inertia.

So, is New Zealand a role model for India? We have never heard that, never felt that way. India’s aspiration, as voiced by all sorts of Indians, is what New Zealand currently is, yet India has never considered that island country a model. There is a perception that a nation’s role model has to resemble it. In some significant way, like race or culture, but chiefly in heft. This is very different from how individuals think. The role models of people usually have nothing in common with their fans.

Who then is India’s role model? Which prosperous happy nation does India broadly aspire to be? What is our goal? Which nation does India imitate the most? What did India’s response to the pandemic tell us about whom we imitate?

The United States was for long the best candidate. Even in the 80s, when politicians and academic theoreticians made it look like India wished to be like Russia, no one else believed that. To be USA was a more worthy and even realistic goal. It seemed more relevant than Britain. Just over a decade ago, The Times of India considered abandoning British spellings for American.

But is the United States what India aspires to be anymore? The US has declined in prestige. The extreme success of democracy in reflecting public opinion has not resulted in what naive writers prophesied. In fact, the opposite has occurred. Hyper-democracy has turned American politics more chaotic than India’s. Even the articulation of its intellectuals that we once thought was a humanitarian force has now been revealed as a place where charlatans hide. And its police appears to be more dangerous than ours. And, who would have thought the US will manage a pandemic worse than India?

The prestige of Britain had declined a few decades ago. Even though it is more endearing than the US, from a modern Indian point of view, it has lost its glory and menace. Also, the new Indian middle classes despise its cultural symbols, not because Britain had once colonized India, but because those relics remind people of their despicable aristocrats. On the other hand, Americans have successfully marketed the ambiguous fact that it is a paradise for “hardworking” underdogs.

Western Europe was never in contest. It was considered too dissimilar, unattainable and beyond imitation, like New Zealand.

It may not be so apparent this month, but the fact is that in the past decade, the Indian middle classes had begun to adore a new aspirational model: China. India has had only three serious role models—Britain, the United States and China. And for the public and a section of politicians China was the most attractive.

The new urban Indian middle classes had an overt and covert love for the fact that China did not ail from democracy. It didn’t attach any importance to freedom of speech and journalistic freedom.

People who earn a living from freedom of speech have always made it appear that the freedoms they value the most are also valued by others. This was never true. Most people don’t care. In fact, people are more intolerant to freedom of speech than governments. In any case, India, for all its imitations of the West, was never truly free. For an artist, there is an ambiguous ban on talking freely about religions, caste, language and sex. India is a paradise for those who claim to be offended.

China’s recent successes are a result of a good imitation of its role models: United States, and, to an extent, Japan. China imitated or stole American technologies very well. In the past, east Asia prospered through an efficient imitation of Western capitalism and culture. Japan itself prospered by revering the United States. India, meanwhile, has had a more confused approach.

Nehru’s India had copied socialism and communism poorly. It imported all the bad parts, but did not implement the good parts, like investing in primary education, universal healthcare, social equality and public freedoms for women. India has imitated capitalism, too, in a confused manner.

Today, India does not have a clearly defined role model. It is a bit of this, a bit of that. Is it time then for India to quit living the destinies of other societies and find its own vision? That will require a modern philosopher to lead India who can also win elections. An outlandish expectation. For now, what is practical is for India to use other successful nations as anti-models. What have advanced nations taught India?

Wealth will always be unevenly distributed; The very meaning of wealth is in its uneven distribution; Prosperity deepens a sense of misery because it lowers the threshold for what qualifies as misery; There will always be strife because elite losers will recruit the impressionable to rebel on some moral pretext; Universal education does not result in an intelligent population; Most people want to be good, but they prefer evil to the people they despise.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





The uncomfortable question of who our worst-off are


2020-07-05

In a mostly dark-skinned nation, who are our “blacks”? Who are India’s worst off? Who are the country’s equivalent of African-Americans? By this I mean the group of Indians who are discriminated against the most; who are easily identified through some markers and often made to feel small; and whom the cops single out. For decades, Dalits held an indisputable claim to be that group. But it is time to acknowledge that Muslims have taken their place.

A few months ago, American leaders like Bernie Sanders and Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez made dubious assumptions that there was a “genocide” of Muslims going on in India. The term has not been heard in public since. It was a lazy exaggeration of what was, nevertheless, a series of murders of Muslims. Any talk of death gets attention, but usually the bigger problem is not death, but living. The many small unsung things that have to go right. How you are perceived by your appearance or name—that is a form of dignity. In that respect, Dalits never had it as bad as Muslims.

Cities liberated Dalits to a large extent. Here they are anonymous and free of ancient culture. Except in some situations, like marriage, nobody seems to care much for their caste. No one of sane mind practises untouchability anymore, not even in villages; let us ignore for a moment what the pandemic has unleashed—making everyone an untouchable to everyone else. A Dalit Zomato delivery agent or an air-conditioner mechanic on Urban Clap will not fear that moment when his name is shared with a customer. If you dig deeper into many contemporary “caste atrocity” stories, what may emerge are layers of personal feuds that are couched as instances of casteism.

Muslims live in different circumstances. They are not safer in cities than in villages. Here they are more likely to be found in a communal ghetto than Dalits. Even over 15 years ago, when I went around Mumbai pretending to be “Mohammed Khan” looking for prime accommodation, a Dalit would probably have found a home more easily. The situation appears far worse today.

Let us imagine some hypothetical situations. What would disturb a typical Hindu family more today—a daughter of the house marrying a Dalit, or a Muslim? Can you, intuitively, see a Muslim quarrelling on the metro? A measure of a person’s status in his nation is his freedom to misbehave mildly, and we can sense that Muslims may have lost some confidence.

You may argue that Indian Muslims have done well. Among them are a tech billionaire, a pharma billionaire, the most popular actors, beloved cricketers, a former cricket captain, and countless millionaires. How then could they be India’s African-Americans? But “blacks” would tell us that some of the most popular Americans are African-American, one of them was even a president, but that does not transform the way they are perceived by the rest.

Rather, the success of some Muslims and their domination of some industries tends to convert professional resentment into communal bias. If there was a way to study the origins of Bollywood camps, the factions within, we may perhaps see that a part of the tension emerges from professional jealousies that are intensified by the fact that some dominant players of the industry happen to be followers of Islam.

We can see this elsewhere, too, in other fields and professions, like appliance servicing, the manufacture of decor items, or household help services. Much of what we see as communal has origins in economic competition for limited resources. Dalits, on the other hand, have had a near monopoly over economic activity that other caste groups would not do—like skinning cattle, where their competition was only from Muslims.

This suggests that while the status of poor Muslims in India is similar to that of African-Americans, better-off Muslims share some similarities with Jews of early 20th century Europe. (I am reluctant to say this, though, because of the false cries of “genocide” that resemble the hysteria over “farmer suicides” and reinforce the notion that if people are not dying, things must be getting better.)

Dalits have faced extraordinary problems. They were not allowed a fair start and they spent whole generations just trying to catch up. Other castes resented reservations for them. Some even maligned their “intelligence”, which in India is a measure of exam-taking abilities. Despite all this, most Dalits have not had the heart to abandon Hinduism. Posh folk who can’t seem to leave their own bad marriages often wonder why Dalits don’t walk out of their religion.

India, remorseful and practical, did everything to make the lives of Dalits better. Muslims, too, have been wooed by various political parties, but in materially useless cultural ways that did little to enrich them.

But does it matter who India’s “blacks” are? Does a nation need to acknowledge its primary victims? In the US, the voices of African-Americans, inuits and impoverished Caucasians find ears. But then, are some voices louder? Is compassion a finite resource of a nation? Yes, it appears.

Broadly speaking, the media and entertainment industry has only three products: fact, fiction and hysteria. A small fraction of its influence is devoted to the risky effort of persuading audiences with finite attention spans to become better people.

So, if Dalits have won some battles, and if Muslims have taken their place as India’s most disadvantaged, it needs to be noted.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Why it doesn’t matter that humans are basically good


2020-07-12

Were there lovers in prehistoric times? And did fathers put their little girls on their shoulders to show them things far away? If early men were so barbaric, as nicer men now claim, how did women and children survive the epochs? Were the weak always the slaves of stronger men? If sati was as prevalent in India as historians claim, why weren’t all widows burned on the pyres of their husbands? Did millions of Indians, even as recently as the 18th century, simply accept that their girls could be burnt alive? Or, was sati merely a rare anomaly that some Colonials charlatans magnified? Why do you think people in olden days did not have the same feelings that you have?

Are humans innately good, or are they drawn to cruelty if they can get away? Why is there love, community, altruism, sacrifice and modern Scandinavia?

You know that there are scholarly answers to these questions, most of which emerge from what I suspect is the most spurious part of science—anthropology. These days, when I hear “hunter-gatherer”, or “our tribal instincts”, I know some nonsense is coming. The most influential and popular answer for decades has been that if humans had complete freedom to do what they wanted, there would be mayhem and barbarity.

But in an almost persuasive book, Humankind: A Hopeful History, the Dutch historian Rutger Bregman tries to dismantle this notion. He argues that people will instead coexist in great harmony. “We had evolved to gather berries and chill out.”

If you are tired of Caucasians telling us what we have evolved to do, the book is absorbing for its demolition of what other Caucasians have been telling us we have evolved to do. In the process, Bregman exposes as farce some of the most celebrated “historical accounts” of human cruelty, often involving tribals on remote islands eating each other, or at least slaughtering. He also brings up a famous experiment of 1971 in a Stanford University basement. Readers of popular anthropology may have quoted this experiment to their friends to hold forth on the barbaric instinct of humans. In that experiment, a psychologist named Philip Zimbardo hired volunteers to assume roles of prison guards and prisoners. After a few days, Zimbardo claimed, the “guards” had become monsters even though the whole exercise was play-acting. The world was fascinated by yet another reminder that humans are drawn to barbarity. But Bregman says that the experiment was “a hoax”. Most “guards” had refused to play sadistic games with their “prisoners”, and many in fact treated the captives with kindness. The few “guards” who had behaved poorly had been tutored and coerced by Zimbardo to act in that manner.

In the Battle of Gettysburg in 1863, during the American Civil War, records show that most soldiers refused to fire at other humans, or only pretended to. They kept loading their already loaded guns with ammunition to satisfy their superiors. Bregman relishes this fact. Also that, “In the US Air Force, less than 1% of fighter pilots were responsible for almost 40% of the planes brought down.”

All this gives Bregman the confidence to posit that in the history of war, soldiers may have killed far less than people think.

In demolishing many of the famous experiments and theories of anthropologists as well as historians who had earlier argued that humans were innately barbarians, Bregman inevitably assails or at least embarrasses popular figures like Jared Diamond, Steven Pinker, Malcolm Gladwell, Richard Dawkins, and literary works like William Golding’s Lord of the Flies.

It appears that there is much rubbish about human nature peddled by three vaunted fields of human intellect—anthropology, psychology and literature.

It’s not that Bregman himself doesn’t bring in “hunter-gatherers”. He does, a lot. He argues that Neanderthals were smarter than Homo sapiens, but were doomed because they were not nice or social enough to transmit great ideas among themselves the way sapiens could. Human intelligence, he says, was a “coincidental by-product of friendliness”.

Even though I feel only someone from a rich nation can offer such a naive assessment, I do not think an idea is flawed just because it is naive. If, far back, all our tribes were a bit like Holland, a modern Dutchman will be in a good position to see this more clearly than a present-day Indian or Iraqi. So, I have no quarrel with his hypothesis that we are fundamentally, inescapably and helplessly good. But I think it does not matter.

Most people might be good, sort of. But it does not matter because evil needs just a few to triumph. Over a billion Indians can be hardwired to be good, but it takes just a few dozen to commit unspeakable acts of cruelty. That is why people lean towards rules and order and civilization—to be protected from a handful of dangerous characters

Bregman’s explanation of most evil is that it is an aberration, a rare anomaly. He is right, but that is enough to alter the world. That is the power that the abnormal has over the normal, and that is the reason abnormality has survived in a species that otherwise has so much love and joy in its heart.

Also, the strongmen of the modern world are not islands of authority who have usurped power by force. Rather, they are powerful because they reflect the sentiments of large numbers. So, most humans may not be barbarians, but they often outsource evil to one who might be.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Why future artists should get stuck in science streams


2020-07-19

I propose a library sign: “Be quiet, like Indian parents whose children scored less than 90% in their boards”.

If you have ears or eyes, you may have found it hard last week to escape the jubilation of people whose children had scored high in Class 12. Or this annual headline: “Girls Outshine Boys”. The outshining happens every year in almost all examinations, including the civil services, but rarely in objective-type quantitative reasoning tests.

The way parents react to academic success, they clearly think that it guarantees a good material life, or at least that academic failure foreshadows financial insecurity. But then how did the lives of India’s thousands of toppers turn out? Did the last-benchers fare as poorly as their teachers prophesied? We are not talking about happiness here, as any measure of that complicated thing is a sophisticated fraud. Purely on material terms, did the past toppers find the life and visas that were prophesied? They were, of course, promised boring but secure and lucrative jobs—did that happen? Will last week’s toppers thrive in a world where their education and degrees and whole professions might be obsolete?

Over the past few years, many Indian parents have resisted the veneration of exam-taking, but they had to fulfil their quota to go wrong. As a result, they have become besotted with a fable that is growing more and more persuasive—that what a prospective engineering graduate may really want to “do in life” is wildlife photography. Or sing, or write, or make movies. And that if adolescents “pursue” their artistic talents, instead of science or medicine, they will be happy, even rich.

I myself have suggested such a scenario in an article about 12 years ago, and that outside the engineering and medical streams, there was “the beautiful world of the backbenchers”. I wish to make some revisions to my earlier view.

An adolescent who is reasonably good at science and maths, but finds them boring and wants to pursue a more exciting career in a “creative field”, is not necessarily doing the right thing by abandoning formal science education. Here I am not talking about youth who have a deep interest in the arts and wish to learn, in a scholarly way, the history and aspects of what other people have created. I am only referring to those who might be creators themselves, who believe they have a gift in non-scientific domains and that they will be wasting it away in the science streams.

To a true artist, nothing is a waste, especially science, because science is philosophy. In fact, I believe that most of philosophy is merely a set of dim questions asked too early in the progress of science. In any case, no artistic gift can be taught. There can be great insights, but an artistic gift gets better as it marinates within all your ongoing experiences. So, formal education in the arts is for lovers of art and not the artist. In some young artists, formal education may do some serious damage to his or her basic instincts.

German filmmaker Werner Herzog is known to have said, “Somebody who has been a boxer in Africa would be better trained as a filmmaker than if he had graduated from one of the ‘best’ film schools in the world. All that counts is real life.” This is in line with his advice to aspiring filmmakers to learn “a trade that has nothing to do with cinema”.

This is true for every creative profession. And this is exactly what adolescent artists who are proficient in the sciences are offered on a platter—to be artists who can comprehend and enjoy the philosophy of science without the bleak prospects of being stranded in dull lucrative jobs.

In any case, creative work is not a paradisiacal experience that it is made out to be. Anything that becomes a job, a career, will become dull, or at least have parts that are plain boring and tedious. The secret of most artists is that they hate many aspects of their craft. They enjoy something in the heart of it all, the ambiguous core, but most other things are boring.

For the past several years, my mother has been talking to me about her novel. She enjoys the ideas in her head as they form, but she has not got down to writing anything substantial on paper. It is hard physical labour. There are millions of writers in the world who have never written a word—they have these beautiful ideas in their heads, but when they have to bring them out into the physical world, something goes wrong; those ideas are not so beautiful anymore and then there is the accompanying sense of intense fatigue.

That is why the most foolish advice that I have heard seasoned writers give the youth is “read, read, read”. I have heard this dramatic iteration many times. That’s like asking young cricketers to watch videos of Sachin Tendulkar. Writers must write, write and write, and run miles or lift heavy weights. If you are not physically fit, your body will fool you into overrating your mediocre third draft.

I find it amusing that the rigorous scientific stream prepares an adolescent better for such a job than the delightful laxness of the artistic streams.

So, if there are potential artists out there who have scored in their high 90s, making their parents preen, and who have, through their own exam-taking abilities, made it too emotionally expensive to quit the looming science stream, I say it is not such a bad pressure to face. A lot of science is pure art.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Bollywood is ripe for a takeover by a pragmatic rebel


2020-07-26

The revolt that has hit the Hindi film industry has parallels in the anti-corruption movement, even though in “Bollywood”, both the camps observe intermittent fasting.

In the Anna Hazare movement, politicians who did not have the capacity to win elections, also known as activists, revolted against professional politicians. In the anti-nepotism movement, filmmakers and actors who have found it hard to enter commercial cinema’s mainstream have revolted against a small cartel that they claim controls the industry by promoting cronies and sabotaging competition. Both the movements project the lame masquerade of making the world a better place, but they derive their force from something far more potent—self-interest and the fury of the second rung that wishes to be the top rung.

Both movements seem to presume that the general public is naive, short-changed, and stultified by prolonged exposure to low standards. Here lies their doom.

The first wave of the anti-corruption movement failed without ending corruption in India, or even transforming politics. This is because it made the wrong presumption that India is morally superior to Indian politics, while the fact was that politics is an accurate reflection of the will and character of people. In essence, modern India is what it is by popular sanction.

The commercial film industry, like the rest of capitalism, is a form of democracy. A product is produced based on market surveys, instincts and conjectures to please consumers; money is spent on influencing consumers, but in the end, consumers are free to vote. Yes, in laying claim to the lottery of success, the children and friends of the powerful have a huge head start. But success itself is not guaranteed. In fact, most star children whose debut breaks are genetically transmitted to them fail. A film cartel can shrink the pool of people who have the best shot at commercial success, but success itself is not preordained. People have to vote.

While commercial cinema is a democracy, “art” is an autocracy of the elite. The business of art seems in the sway of cartels far more than the business of entertainment is.

There is a reason why commercial superstars endure. A lot of money has gone into the making of commercial superstars and in training Indians to enjoy a type of junk cinema. This cannot be neutralized by mere talent, just like mainstream Indian politics cannot be transformed by the mere morals of disenchanted rebels. “You can’t get rid of us,” Shah Rukh Khan told me in an interview over 15 years ago for a story on why ageing actors endure in Hindi cinema. “We are deeply rooted in your psyche.” He is still around.

For the anti-nepotism movement in the film industry to succeed, it needs what the anti-corruption movement needed to survive in a practical form—someone like, say, Arvind Kejriwal.

Anywhere in the world, a crusader-turned-politician starts out as an idealist, and when the great fuel of protest has taken him to a height but is only a burden thereon, he tends to jettison it for more practical fuels.

Any idea that overrates human nature will fail, but a revolutionary need not entirely lose his ideals just because he needs to win over a vast number of people. That essentially is what a typical humanitarian-turned-politician is—never a sell-out but somehow still in the game.

Hindi cinema has had its share of practical crusaders and small revolutions long before India’s anti-corruption movement arrived on the political scene. Ramgopal Varma, for instance, whose middlebrow cinema took considerable risks in the battle for the mainstream. It is fascinating that even though he accused “Bollywood” of being enslaved by a formula, his films thrived on it. He only made three kinds of films—about gangsters, about a vulnerable girl, and about ghosts. Artistes are so often accused of being repetitive, but it is a good idea for them to mine a familiar domain than to create shallow stories about things they don’t care about. Eventually, Varma’s new films failed not because of formula, but perhaps for the same reasons that usually doom iconoclasts—deep faith in their own instincts, low respect for others’ opinions and the absence of a strong, critical spouse.

Varma did not create a new audience for his middlebrow films. He only showed that there was an audience for them—if not in millions, at least in the hundreds of thousands. Varma was replaced by Phantom Films, a company created by Vikramaditya Motwane, Madhu Mantena, Vikas Bahl and its best known face, Anurag Kashyap.

Kangana Ranaut, the mascot of the ongoing iteration of the anti-nepotism movement, may be correct when she says Kashyap has moved closer to the mainstream; but she is wrong to present this as an accusation. The natural progression of a revolution is to become the new mainstream. That entails rebels discovering that the people they once despised are actually not so despicable.

In a recent interview, Kashyap argued that the lament against nepotism is “10 years late”, and that there are vast opportunities today for the unconnected. Streaming platforms themselves are an effective avatar of a transformative activist. No other force in the field of entertainment has levelled it in such a short period. That is the beauty of capitalism—a revolutionary can be a corporation. Many industries have had potent rebellions against powerful cartels, but many of them failed because their anti-establishment movements did not mutate into a mainstream power.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Why the country’s new plan for education is smart


2020-08-02

Every time I see a new underpass, I get a bit emotional. An underpass does not win elections. Why do politicians do these little good things? Why do bureaucrats do their jobs? The loudest Indian lament is that the government is lousy at its job; but the greatest mystery is why some good things happen in India in the first place.

You may say an underpass generates illicit cash down a whole chain of practical men. I am a big admirer of self-interest as the most influential force of good, but still I don’t think greed is a complete theory that fully explains the origins of good deeds. Maybe, like many other things in India, nobody fully knows why they do what they do, even when it is good. The mystery lingers not only in small things, like underpasses, but also in some major policies. The country’s new education policy, for instance.

National guidelines, for the first time in over three decades, to transform how Indians learn has such a long arc and its impact so widespread, that it does not affect the career of any professional politician or bureaucrat. There are evidently some cultural motives in the policy, but they do not run too deep. The guidelines are a reminder that the instinct of most humans, including Indians, is to make their tribe better.

Here are some reasons why I like the new education policy:

The vernacular-speaking Indian’s quarrel with the English language is easing: Among the significant recommendations of the policy is that the medium of instruction for primary school children be their mother tongue or the regional language where the school is located. While this is not mandatory, it may appear, at first glance, to be an extension of that tiring war that provincial politicians and cultural figures wage against English. But I see this as a truce, and even a concession of our culture hawks that English is too useful to be denied to students beyond their early formative years.

The suave Westernised Indian has receded in public life, and the non-English speaking Indian is rising. Even so, the guardians, champions and beneficiaries of Indian culture have faced a problem—their cultural wares, languages especially, have not been of use to the young. Without being of material use, a cultural colonizer will merely get physical territory and not people’s minds.

After how many years of being useful to a society does a foreign language become native? Maybe Indian cultural figures are beginning to accept an answer—“around now”. That’s what I see in the feeble and ambiguous recommendation to use regional languages as a medium of instruction in primary schools. What is left unsaid is the inevitability of English beyond that phase.

The eclipse of English in early education is actually a good idea for a majority of Indian students. In the lives of upscale kids, English is in the air. As a result, it becomes their dominant language. But a majority of Indian children struggle to pick up English in the “good” schools where their ambitious parents put them. As a result, they struggle to grasp the basics of all subjects, as we witnessed with “slum children” in our own school days.

India accepts the true meaning of “vocation”: When I was a boy, “vocation” meant something bleak that students who failed in science and maths did with their lives. In reality, a vocation is what a person is best suited to do, and what one truly wants to do. The most extraordinary aspect of the new education policy is the respect it accords various intelligent activities like carpentry and plumbing, and their being ushered into the mainstream.

I am reminded of the bad luck of some boys I grew up with. They were great mechanics but were made to feel dumb and useless because they could not spell “mechanic” in English or take a “rhombus” seriously. We have lost millions of childhoods to a poor analysis of the meaning of intelligence and education. By bringing “vocation” into the mainstream, India has, at least in theory, taken an opportunity to liberate itself from the dark ages of colonial education.

Until now in India, what was considered formal school education was separate from what was considered vocational. The new policy attempts to change that. I see the introduction of computer coding in primary school not as something esoteric, but as something that is in line with the merging of education and “vocational training”.

The liberation from education: The proposed flexibility of college students to leave college midway, pursue a job and return to resume education is not only intelligent, but also one of the most humane ideas India has tried. Unlike the influential middle class, most Indians have a bad start to their lives. Their families and finances are unsteady. They give up the idea of college or suffer through a three- or four-year entrapment in pursuit of a degree. Giving them the freedom to step out of college when circumstances demand, and later pick up from where they left off, will transform millions of lives.

But what would have been truly courageous of India is—as this column had once argued—to altogether remove the requirement of a degree for non-technical jobs and all aptitude tests. Millions of young Indians who do not wish to pursue knowledge are trapped in meaningless education, wasting the best years of their lives, purely to obtain a piece of paper. If the young are gainfully employed and they receive love for the actual work they do, instead of pursuing charlatan degrees, cultural hawks may note, half of all activism will cease to exist.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





The clarity with which atheists should view believers


2020-08-09

Almost every atheist has said this at least once, “But I believe in a force.” Some of them have since downgraded truth as far less exciting—that life and the universe have no point, no meaning. Some atheists feel, even when they have not ingested any substance, that living things are “interconnected”. Others say something in the base of your spine can “awaken”. What is common to the whole spectrum of atheists is that they tend to look down upon believers in God. They deny the magic of divinity.

Last week, when ground was broken for a shrine to Ram in Ayodhya, people who consider themselves rationalists once again condemned believers as delusional and irrational. But this is a useless way to see most of humanity. How then must they perceive believers?

There are rational explanations for God. As an ancient fable that has been taken too seriously, as a contagious delusion from a long time ago, as a misunderstanding of dramatic natural phenomena. All these miss the most important attribute of God—success. God has endured. Across the millennia, innumerable gods have vanished, but the ones that survived are only evolutions of older gods. Dismissing a force so ancient, one that has endured, is an expensive mistake that India’s modern intellectuals committed after Independence.

They were deluded by an impractical modern political idea—secularism. Imagine someone trying to sell a subscription to an orphanage; that is what secularism is from a cultural point of view. The dismissal of Hindu discontent in the name of modernity resulted in the political annihilation of those associated with that insult, and the present miseries of Muslims.

There is something sad about the consecration of a Hindu temple on a site where a mosque stood for centuries and was then demolished by a mob. The Supreme Court of India was supposed to be a creation of modernity and rationality but, in the end, one of its most influential verdicts, granting the disputed site in Ayodhya to Hindus, seemed like an emotional act. And there is a message that the temple’s construction may send: modernity, too, is a fable like religion, and the overestimation of modernity will always be punished by the past.

The more we insult the past in the name of the future, the more territory the present will have to concede to the past. The future is merely a hope of a better age and better humans; the past, on the other hand, is a vast body of evidence of what humans really are, and what truly matters to us. That, in my view, is what God is. An insight from history into human nature.

The sound of prayers and even the physical actions of rituals are from a very ancient time, when the present gods were other gods and present faiths existed in other forms. This is a matter of pure heritage. How then can modern folk, who so claim to love heritage, lament God? The true heritage of a place is rarely what global intellectuals nag us about. The real culture of a place is what does not require nagging and lament—like local food, music, practical garments, rituals and God.

Those who are hurt by a scratch on an ancient monument are often the type who constantly disfigure ancient myths. For instance, the almost annual feminist rewriting of Sita as a more independent woman. Sita shows us the preoccupations of another time, just as Agatha Christie’s depictions of Africans were a reflection of her times. Should heritage only be what is good about our ancestors that modern atheists approve of? From a literary point of view, it is pointless to convert a figure like Sita into an unremarkable fictitious modern person.

In this light, believers are our true conservationists. They resist the sanctimonious marauders who try to demolish their faith in order to build a shrine to modernity.

From the antiquity of God, we know the central principles of human story-telling that will endure. That if you want to tell a great story, there can be conflicts and grey characters, but in the end, good has to triumph.

The fact that humans tend to believe in the paranormal should ideally make the so-called rationalist ask, “Am I a believer too, and if so, who is my Ram?”

There have always been two kinds of believers. Those who believe in God, and atheists. Some of the most influential scientists of Western civilization were great believers in God, like Isaac Newton, or strongly suspected there was some kind of God, like Charles Darwin. And there were many scientists who said there was no God but were deeply influenced by the magic realism of divine fables. It is not a coincidence that the Big Bang theory can be summarized by one the most famous opening lines of a story ever: “In the beginning was the word…”

The origin of scientific inquiry lies either in religion or in a revolt against it. In fact, science itself has become religion. It has all the crucial attributes—an abstraction explains a mystery, a handful of people fully understand the medium in which the explanation is delivered, they evangelize, people believe, and the infidels are ostracized. Can’t we see this quality in theories of the Big Bang, quantum mechanics and climate change?

Despite our claims of “logical thinking”, we have not arrived at our present beliefs after a process of deep honest debate in our heads. We believe first, and then find evidence. We are all believers. Clarity is simply knowing who is our Ram.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Why the melancholic are unable to find a ‘cure’ for joy


2020-08-16

Even before the coronavirus pandemic began, though not very long before that, modern people had rehabilitated melancholy and ended its shame. As a result, that reasonless urban sorrow itself has assumed the character of an epidemic. Maybe it is the newness of the conversation, maybe it is the newness of a democracy in communication where everyone has a voice today that only public figures were allowed earlier, there is a feeling that these times have made people sad. Yet, this notion belies a very important quality of the sad. The sad have always been sad.

This column is not about why they are so. It will not even answer that weird but frequent question of most readers: “What is my takeaway?” This column is about wonder. Not merely about the fact that the sad around me have been sad since adolescence, mostly. But about how they have always sought to solve their melancholy by seeking refuge in something called “wellness”. And how they have always failed. Every five years, a new “solution” would arrive and they would get deeply immersed in that.

The brief history of the pursuit of happiness by my sad peers is more or less this: It begins in a careful reading of J. Krishnamurthy and the philosophies of other dead people; then the philosophies of living people; a belief in “a force”; then yoga, which is an intense and glorious physical exercise that is, strangely, associated with “meditation”, a word everyone uses with great confidence as though they know what it means.

In the arcs of my sad peers, the meaning of meditation, like the meaning of the mind, itself changes. In my adolescence, I remember, everyone told me meditation was a trance and an absence of thought. The way they said it, you would think such a thing is possible—to go into a trance without a neurological condition, or become thoughtless when wide awake. In the years that followed, meditation got downgraded to a breathing exercise. But what if meditation, like the G-spot, doesn’t exist?

Today, the cure for persistent urban melancholy has moved into an excessive articulation of healthy food, and consumption of books and podcasts by people with “neuro” somewhere in their self-descriptors, who speak of “the mind”. And Big Pharma has succeeded in converting sorrow into a spectrum of clinical depression that can be alleviated by a pill. The capitalism of cures has fragmented mild reasonless sorrow and given it names, like “anxiety”, that lend the illusion of a definite cause to melancholy. The attribution of “reason” to reasonless sorrow has given it the appearance of grief, which is sorrow caused by a specific event. Many cultures, many societies in the world, including India, never had a notion of “depression”. There were, of course, the melancholic, but they were a personality type, and not a pathological type, or even victims.

In the end, no cures work. The sad remain sad. Spiritual philosophy, instead of making the melancholic happier, seems to have been infected by sorrow. Today, in the core of every philosophy is a lingering sadness. People who crave a more joyful form of metaphysics have to seek refuge in science.

Despite its record of utter failure, the wellness industry has only thrived. This is not hard to understand. The wellness industry is a bit like Steve Jobs’ Apple—everything about it is transmitted by highly passionate customers.

Like sex tends to be talked and read about disproportionately by people who don’t get enough of it, the calming of the mind seems most discussed by people whose minds have never been calm. Even as cures continue to fail the sad, newer avenues to express sorrow have risen.

Once there was only literature and some kinds of arts, but today there is another powerful release for the melancholic in the form of organized empathy, also known as activism, which is best described as a conversion of self-absorption into compassion.

Humanitarianism has become a magnet for the melancholic. What is it that comforts them? The intoxicating satisfaction of doing good, surely. But maybe also the proximity to people who are more miserable than they are? Is there a caste system among the sad; do some sad people feel oppressed by the happy, and do they feel superior to other sadder people?

The happy often respond to the sad with well-meaning foolishness. “Why can’t you be happier, you have everything.” Or, “You’ll be fine.”

But the popular cures of every age might themselves take the melancholic further from a solution: the over-articulation of what one is going through; the ceaseless talk of human suffering; the vaunted post-modern breathing exercises that ignore muscular strength and aerobic exhilaration, and the immersion in lament arts and spurious books about “the mind”, and the conversion of the reasonless innate melancholy into a sadness that has villains, usually the very people who love them.

As we can see, the sad are interesting. They have deeper things to say. The joyful, on the other hand, are lame and banal. Yet, most people are happy. It does not appear that way, but it is the way of the world. People are susceptible to reasonless unprovoked joy. The body feels so good, there is so much air in the lungs, there are no aches, they have a low threshold for joy, and there is in them the illusion of good tidings. So lame and banal.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Endurance may be nature’s reward for being ordinary


2020-08-23

Indians may have celebrated Mahendra Singh Dhoni as Mr Happy Ending if the compliment were not so disgraced. Instead, cricket fans have to settle for an honour that sounds far less Indian: “The Finisher”.

“The Finisher” denotes the fact that when some runs were left for a team victory, he would arrive at the crease, jab, poke, sprint and score them. When he was thus “finishing”, the sporting icon who announced his retirement from international cricket last week would regale fans with facial calmness, a type of acting in sports that is achieved by something as simple as chewing gum, or even smiling.

The people who celebrate Dhoni as “the finisher” are often the same who deliver this dim analysis: “Sachin never won matches.” Is it so hard to see why a guy who opens the innings, and scores fast enough not to endure, is not around in the last overs? Yet, they are generous to another man who came towards the end to make the final runs.

Dhoni’s fable is in reality about endurance. And endurance is a fascinating quality because it has the appearance of a spectacular virtue that merges the limits of the body with those of the mind. But endurance is chiefly a refuge of mediocrity. Endurance is a reward for being limited, just as longevity is so often a reward for playing safe.

Dhoni is of no interest to me. I am here to propose a theory of endurance; stay with me the full course.

In the novel Of Love and Other Demons by Gabriel Garcia Marquez, a character observes, “The human body is not made to endure all the years that one may live.”

There is the joy of living, the whole point of living, and there is the persistence of life. This persistence in a creaking body is endurance, a form of death.

There is endurance all around us. The safe clerk who has been in the same job for half a century; the ancient marriage of our parents, which is a private treaty of two equal handicaps with no better prospects; Rahul Dravid, enduring bowlers for dreary hours, cheered on by other Dravids in other professions; and cricketers who extend their playing years in that refuge for the mediocre where limitations are couched in triumphant terms of leadership—cricket captaincy.

Endurance is greatness for ordinary people, it is compensation for ordinariness. In any profession, a guy who endures is a sign that there might be something wrong with the system.

Let us get language out of the way. What is often called “endurance” is usually not. The 42-km discipline of the marathon, for instance. Elite marathon runners cover the distance at a speed of 100 metres in less than 18 seconds. This is faster than the 100-metre sprint of most healthy people in the world. Elite long-distance runners do use a lot of fast-twitch muscles, fibres that aid sprinting. The professional marathon thus is not an endurance sport; it is a long sprint.

What is in reality endurance running is the amateur long-distance scene, which includes marathons and “ultra-marathons”, a slow valiant slog, and is unsurprisingly filled with the middle-aged. Endurance running is a rare sport where people who are not very athletic can survive and even appear to perform well.

A remarkable quality of Dhoni as a batsman was that he did not lose his wicket easily. Like the other master-endurers, Dravid and Steve Waugh, he did not have curses that interfered with endurance—a wide range of strokes or suicidal artistic flamboyance. Not surprisingly, he had a high survival rate, a high number of ‘not-outs’, which is a statistically useful element because batting averages are calculated by dividing total runs scored by the number of times a batsman got out. This makes his otherwise ordinary batting career look good.

It may appear that Roger Federer and Tendulkar are exceptions, but their longevity is like the long sprint of elite marathon. They did not last as mere survivors; they were so good that after their initial greatness diminished, they were still great.

Dhoni, on the other hand, endured not only innings by innings, but also prevailed long after his best years were over, perhaps through a combination of unmeasurable qualities, wisdom, swag, patriotism and small-town tenacity. But mostly in captaincy. Like many other batsmen with limits, such as Steve Waugh and Sourav Ganguly. It is not a coincidence that it is never a Tendulkar or a Brian Lara who comes to be known for a multitude of ambiguous traits, including leadership. They are simply known as genius batsmen.

You may want to quarrel with me over the matter of cricket captaincy. You might tell me Waugh led Australia to many wins, and I will tell you that with the same Aussie team, even I could have won many matches, with my mom as vice-captain. You could say that Ganguly “nurtured” the young; and I will say this promotion of new talent might have been to counter his more gifted peers. You may say Dhoni “rotated the field” well and that he yelled wise things from behind the stumps. And I will ask you if those things made him deserving of a place in the Indian side long after he was past his peak.

The fable of Dhoni helped him endure even after he could not sustain the apparent farce of captaincy anymore. And it cost us the last World Cup. Each time we have lost cricket’s biggest trophy, it has been because of one endurer stealing a place, and we did not realize that endurance is just persistence of the ordinary.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Ordinary people are a lot smarter than made out to be


2020-08-30

I hope young Indian celebrities who are considering suicide will drop the idea after watching the ongoing feeding frenzy around the death of Sushant Singh Rajput. I do not have clinching arguments about why those who wish to die must instead live, still I am on the side of life, even if life includes television news.

Over the past few weeks, some actors, professional gossipers and alleged news channels have been trying to frame the actor’s death as murder. They have unearthed black magic, drugs, and even the role of his former girlfriend, actor Rhea Chakraborty, whom they accused of manipulating him in supernatural and scientific ways.

At first glance, it may appear that the Rajput news cycle is further evidence that most of the world is not very smart. After word got out that Chakraborty had said Rajput’s mental illness included claustrophobia, some people circulated images of him in the cockpit of a plane, and of him in a space suit. People also posted news of his visit to Nasa. Not only to suggest he was not claustrophobic. Indians associate even a visit to Nasa as a sign of intelligence, and intelligence in India includes sanity.

News channels that have a reputation of being more sophisticated and are watched by people who eat asparagus, were not above the farce. On one, when Rhea promoted the idea that “Me-Too” allegations against him may have pushed him off the brink, the anchor was not comfortable with this angle and kept steering the conversation towards drugs. One has to marvel at handlers of the “Me-Too” campaign. Several depressed men have killed themselves after stating that false allegations of sexual predation were the reason for their action. But a whole nation in search of a “cause” for an actor’s death is somehow herded by a cosmic hand away from the fact that Rajput was a “Me-Too” accused, and that he had claimed it was a false allegation, and that such an allegation against a suicidal man is deadlier than black magic or professional marginalization.

You may say it is futile to search for sense in most of what the world does. There seems to be civilizational wisdom in the view of the mainstream modern world that this nonsensical cycle of news about Rajput has come about because most humans lack sense, that they are naive, and that the capitalism of the news business is merely serving up a product that has wide acceptance.

This is not true. People are smarter than those whose job it is to predict what people want. The world is smarter than the media.

It may appear that most of the nation has been taken in by news about Rajput, but that is because the garrulous make a disproportionate contribution to the noise. Ordinary people are far more rational and intelligent and even wiser than they are made out to be. They are, of course, entertained by the defamation of a beautiful young woman. But then, people have the capacity to be entertained and simultaneously discard the news.

The abstract fields of media, academics and art constantly make assumptions that the collective intelligence of humanity is very low. For example, we are told that Indians don’t deserve swanky public utilities because they are so poor they will deface or pilfer them; that most people like mindless cinema and dim books, and that without violent cops the whole nation would collapse into barbaric anarchy. Yet, every time Indians were offered a high-quality service, they have respected and cared for it. Like the Delhi Metro system, where Delhi behaves with very different civic values than in the Delhi outside the transit tunnels.

Also, it is India’s vast semi-literate masses that have sustained electoral democracy, simply by going out to vote during the years when the elite longed for “a benign dictator”; and India’s masses, for all their electoral flaws, have constantly improved politics. In fact, if it were not for the outsized influence of India’s middle class over the media, the poor may have improved the quality of politicians even more. And it is the vast masses who quietly bore the brunt of “demonetization” without breaking into riots even when their own money was denied to them for many weeks. And, years later, when covid broke out, they maintained order even as a government made confused and unreasonable demands of them. Also, most third-rate commercial films in all Indian languages have failed miserably. The success of the few hits among them have been analysed poorly. A commercial film succeeds not because of its lack of intelligence, but because of its other qualities.

Even so, I accept that it is naive to be too infatuated by the virtues of crowds. As this column has earlier argued, any idea that overrates human intelligence will fail. In the ongoing media farce around Rajput’s death, there is some complicity of a crowd of ordinary people. But even these large numbers are a small part of the world. Even in these times, the most common attributes of the sane are silence and invisibility.

In any case, it is the sophisticates who taught others the power of ascribing spurious reasons to a suicide when they converted the deaths of farmers and a Dalit student into political movements. The foolishness of the Rajput news cycle that places excessive importance on “the cause” of suicide is no different from frequent claims that Indian farmers could not have died of depression. All too often, what is frivolous and wrong evolves out of what was once serious and wrong.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





It was the idea of debt that created the modern world


2020-09-06

In return for your time, allow me to offer you the surprise that everything we were told about barter might be wrong.

That barter preceded the invention of money, and that barter was the “economic system” of ancient civilizations might be one of the great fake stories of all time. An extraordinary book, Debt: The first 5000 years, by the anthropologist David Graeber suggests that the most famous evangelist of capitalism, Adam Smith, was the most influential originator of that fable, and that Smith may have cooked up stories of “savages” who practised barter. Since Smith’s era, scholars have set out to find evidence of barter as a primitive alternative to money. “But to this day,” Graeber writes, “no one has been able to locate a part of the world where the ordinary mode of economic transaction between neighbours takes the form of ‘I’ll give you twenty chickens for that cow’.”

In the history of the world, there was definitely barter, but it did not precede money, nor was it practised the way many economists have claimed. Barter was never within a settlement, nor among neighbours. Rather, it was among strangers who did not have access to the same resources.

Graeber argues that in an ancient village, a man who wanted cows had no reason not to farm cattle and instead keep chicken, and a man who wanted flour had no reason not to cultivate wheat. Everyone grew what they wanted to consume with the help of inputs that were available to all.

What goods then could neighbours exchange? It was more likely that an outsider hailing from an arid village of, say, weavers, who loved cashew nuts but had no means to cultivate them, and did not possess the currency of cashew-growers but had a lot of silk to offer, would make the trade. According to Graeber, barter was often a truce before imminent war. But money, in some form or another, was older and far more prevalent than barter. Money comes naturally to humans. Like speaking. We did not require the inconvenience of barter.

Graeber, ironically, is better known as a passionate foe of money, an anarchist who was involved in a major way in organizing the “Occupy Wall Street” movement about a decade ago, and exactly the kind of activist who gives me no cause for joy, a rich-world beneficiary of capitalism who rages against capitalism.

But to me, he will primarily always be the author of a treasured book which shows that the most humane thing a humanitarian can do is not stir up facile anarchy, but painstakingly create a great scholarly work that is beyond the means of mere greed. I don’t know why leftists write better books than people I get along with. On Thursday, he died in a hospital in Venice. The cause of his death was not known at the time of filing this column.

Graeber makes a persuasive argument that money emerged from debt; morality emerged from the successful fable of creditors that a debt had to be repaid; and most strife emerged from default. The modern world emerged from the notion that humans owed their lives to the gods, to the king, to their parents, to their masters, and to their gurus. Life continues in this manner, as a persistence of debt. Conservatism is about paying your debts; all rebellion is about the right to default.

In the film Moonstruck, an old woman whose husband is having an affair asks a younger man, “Why do men chase women?”

And the younger man says, “God took a rib from Adam and made Eve. Now maybe men chase women to get the rib back.”

Debt is a bit like that rib. Debt is a hole where there was once something. What there was before the hole, we have long forgotten. This may be why humanitarians, whether they know it or not, are instinctively opposed to the idea of obligations, and they appear to always clamour for rights. Obligations emerge from the idea of innate debt, a sort of primordial debt.

What does money measure? Graeber says money is always a measure of debt, an on-going transferable IOUs in every sovereign nation that some signatory promises to repay. This debt is an ancient rib that everyone has forgotten but its hole is in the heart of all life. The moment a central bank decides to repay its debt, the whole monetary system will lose meaning.

Centuries before the complexity of modern money, the connection between debt and money was easier to see. Why did ancient kings impose taxes? After all, a king owned everything, or at least he could take everything in his kingdom by force. He did not really need tax revenues. Graeber points out that kings introduced taxes to create an object that people owed him—to be precise, kings created tax to create money. Money, as a transferrable token of debt, simplified matters for the king. For instance, instead of feeding vast armies, a king could let soldiers feed themselves at local inns using the sovereign tokens he had issued, which in turn had value for inn-keepers only because they had to pay their king taxes in those tokens. In essence, in the beginning, people did not sell money to buy food; they sold food to buy money.

When I first read this book, I enjoyed it so much I felt I must repay the author in some meaningful way, beyond the mere price of a book. That sentiment is at the heart of Graeber’s Debt. We have been conditioned for centuries to imagine that a moment of joy and beauty is a debt that we need to repay, somehow, in some form. But then, we owe nothing for the joys of living, not even to David Graeber.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





The art of survival in a world of unknowing zombies


2020-09-13

I am writing a zombie movie. No, it is not about the sort of people who watch TV news. I am not being satirical or metaphorical. I really am writing a zombie movie. And I thought, this week, instead of commenting on whatever is going on in the world, why don’t I just let you in on my zombie movie?

I must admit that I am a bit influenced by topical events, but come on, every story is influenced by reality. That much concession you have to extend to me. So, in my zombie movie, you might notice that there is the influence of corona, and the mysterious Indian stamina for totally useless issues that will never improve their lives.

The hero is, of course, you. Why are you so surprised? I’m not making fun of you. It really is you. Hasn’t it occurred to you that the hero in every story is always you? The aspiration of every film is that you identify with one of the main characters. If you don’t, the story is either doomed or acclaimed by six scholars, which is the same as doomed. That is the corruption at the heart of every story, and that is why every story ever told is familiar—it is all about you and your moral self-absorption.

So what happens in the zombie movie is that one day you begin to notice that everyone around you is beginning to behave in a strange manner. They appear to become obsessed with something that sounds like news but has no relevance to their lives. For example: “Rhea killed her boyfriend”, or “Trump is a fascist”. Even though they appear passionate about it, they can only describe it in one line. They have nothing more to say. They hold forth for hours, but in reality they just repeat that same one line. It is a bit like how most people know only a paragraph about stuff outside their domains.

This is a global zombie story, but Indian characters have a unique quality—like the rest of the world, they chant one line of news every day but in at least three languages because Indian zombies are multilingual.

You, the hero, set out to find out what has happened to the world. And you learn the startling fact that there is this virus that is transmitted from phone screens and other monitors, and even paper and all other sources of information. It gets lodged in a receiver’s brain and takes over all expression. Different people are taken over by different lines, as every individual is susceptible to a particular mutation of this ancient virus. Your dad has become a right-wing zombie, your mom has become a religious zombie; your smartest friends, who appear normal in the first minutes of conversation, have become woke zombies; your aunt has become a conspiracy-theory zombie. The virus has been transmitted for centuries in this manner, but never before was it so infectious.

As most fans of zombie movies know, the hero is never the zombie. Everyone else around is, or will be, but not you. You are smart, lucky and sane, just as you suspect. But where my zombie movie departs is that the zombies in my story do not know they are zombies. In fact, they think everyone else is a zombie. Thus, inside the zombie movie, everyone is a hero in a zombie movie.

Zombie friends, zombie parents and zombie cousins confide their fears in you of how everyone else is a zombie. It corroborates your belief that you are sane when ideally it should make you wonder whether you too are unaware of your transformation. You feel odd discussing “what to do about zombies” with zombies, but play along.

You figure out some features of the virus and its transmission—there are super transmitters who have a talent to excrete huge viral loads to millions, and there are more modest transmitters who can only infect one person at a time. And some people are more prone to get infected than others. You like the theory that people who are intellectually superior, who routinely consume supplements of superior knowledge, and who are generally immune to nonsense, are less likely to be infected than people who are not very smart.

You figure out what to do. The infected have to be quarantined, but then no one believes they are infected. As we have seen, they think other people, who are obsessed with one-liners that sound like news, are the ones who are infected. So no zombie is going to self-quarantine. Also, as we saw in the case of that minor pandemic, covid, every intellectual tries to flog his solution as the best solution and condemns those who disagree as “fools” or “corrupt” or “charlatans”. Also, in our movie, most of the intellectuals themselves are zombies who don’t know they are infected.

So you try to counter the transmission of the virus by transmitting your own cure. You do this by tweeting your own big important fabulous ideas. You notice something odd. The more sense you make, the less it is transmitted. The more nonsense you state, the more it travels. Thus, you realize, the medium of transmission itself has been taken over by the virus.

Nevertheless, you valiantly fight on the social media. You find others like you who are not zombies. You fall in love. There are some lovely sex scenes. But after a month of knowing them, you realize that they, too, have become infected.

Eventually, you give up and quarantine yourself. You become a monk. You reject all the temptations—the wealth and pleasures that zombies offer to infect you, their opinions and books. You are lonely, but you are not a zombie. Or are you?

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Why social media isn’t really the real villain of this age


2020-09-20

The Social Dilemma is a documentary that conveys something you have heard many times, but with ominous background music. The facts in the 90-minute film take less than a minute, it seems, to narrate: Social media and email are designed to keep you hooked to your phone and away from “real world”, a superior place where people drink barley and eat sugar with real friends, or say “What’s up” to real acquaintances and look over their shoulders to see if there are more interesting people around.

Everything else about the documentary is melodramatic and dishonest evangelism of a band of “good guys” who were part of the tech industry that created social media and Google. Some of them encashed their stock options and are very rich today, while others appear to have lost out.

The band of late heroes is lead by Tristan Harris, a type of man who calls himself an “ethicist”, who looks angelic and unthreatening, who says all the right things, who pauses for effect and smiles sadly, a hero of people who believe in heroes and therefore never ask what is behind a heroic action.

At the very start of the documentary, the heroes say or imply that the tech industry is not evil by design. But soon the documentary appears to realize that a successful story requires heroes, and heroes require villains. So it sets out to define the villains—the social media companies and Google and others whose products have intoxicated the world.

But then Netflix, which streams this documentary, is even more addictive than social media. Without this streaming service and the transmission of its existence by word-of-mouth on social media, the documentary would have been doomed. Hypocrisy in good people is known as “irony”.

The “ethicists” of the documentary inevitably tell you that if you’re not paying for media content, then you are not the customer, “you’re the product”. The way they claim your time is harvested for “advertisers”, you would think they have never heard of The New York Times or The Guardian or BBC, the revered products of their type whose golden years were funded by advertisers. Advertisers have always funded or greatly subsidized quality journalism. Now, on social media, they have a more efficient way of spending money.

The “ethicists” accuse social media of manipulating human psychology. But this is the objective of every business, including documentaries, streaming platforms and food industry players that permeate the three-dimensional “real” world seen at risk by The Social Dilemma . The manipulation of psychology is also the objective of all arts, but then these arts have failed on this front because they are run by cartels that promote dud self-absorbed bores who never ask, “What do you want?”

The Social Dilemma itself manipulates human psychology in very obvious ways. It exploits the emptiness in salaried people who see hope in every email, and the nameless grief of the bored, and the fear of parents that their children are turning into zombies (like them). The film features some menacing actors who play the bad guys who run tech companies. They stand behind machines and turn dials to control your emotions. Social media algorithms are represented as the sentinel machines you have seen in films, so that you are suitably scared. Of course, there is no activist deceit that is possible without the use of suicide data. The “ethicists” of the film imply that people kill themselves because of the emotions unleashed by social media.

Harris claims that the world is worried about social media. In contrast, he says, when the bicycle appeared, our ancestors had not complained. He is wrong. When the bicycle emerged, the sanctimonious dismissed it as a frivolity of the wealthy youth. Poet John Keats called it “the nothing of its day”. It was deemed dangerous. Books, too, horrified people once.

The “ethicists” of every era have always whined about the way of the world, and about how no one has time for the wonderful art of the whiner. Guess the era of the novel this is extracted from: “Long novels written today are perhaps a contradiction: the dimension of time has been shattered, we cannot love or think except in fragments of time each of which goes off along its own trajectory and immediately disappears”.

This is from the novel If on a Winter’s Night a Traveler by Italo Calvino, published in 1979, and the whine against social media today is exactly the same. In any age, a lament of a noted writer is never an accurate analysis of the world, but rather the writer’s grouse against fast becoming obsolete.

In trying to make the power of social media sound terrifying, the documentary mentions an American basketball star who was persuaded to believe that the world was flat. This is symbolic of the sham this documentary itself is.

Unlike that basketball star, you do not believe the world is flat. Why? The intellect and mental health of a person has an overarching influence on what news he or she will consume. The platform itself is inconsequential. Your choice of disinformation will never be that the Earth is flat; it is likely to be more sophisticated—that Russia influenced the last American presidential election, or that The Social Dilemma is a work of honest humanitarianism.

“How do you wake up from the matrix?” a good guy in the documentary asks. Some people think that just because they can ask this question, it means they themselves are not part of the matrix.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





There has never been a worse time to be famous in India


2020-09-27

Many years ago, when my friend and I were returning from school, we decided to reject fame when we grew up. Our reasoning was that ordinary people, including us, said such horrible things about the famous, and we could not bear the thought of millions of people saying nasty things about us. I was not very sure, though; I slyly whispered to the universe that I was open to becoming a superstar.

The vast benefits of fame were obvious to me. The individual fan who begged for an autograph was an inconsequential pest; a star enjoyed at all times the reaffirming adoration of the nameless millions who were far away in their own dimensions, who could never scale the high walls of the giant mansion granted by stardom. When stars did appear in real life, which was rare, the people of Madras had no doubt over their own role—to be servile, which was the only way they knew to show respect. The famous almost never faced the risk of sharing the same space as the masses, unless they were actors shooting a scene. They were never dragged to court and never arrested.

Many of the joys of fame have survived today. Even so, all things considered, our age is the worst time to be famous, especially in India. I know I am making it look as if fame is an option that you volunteer for. I am aware that stardom is a lottery. But it is a bad toss to win today.

Take, for instance, what’s going on in the Hindi film industry. If you have not been following Indian news, you will not find the next sentence logical: An actor killed himself and a small group of almost-famous actors have accused superstars of discrimination, then abetting suicide, then abetting murder, and then of either taking drugs or dealing in them. Television channels found in this issue an easy way to get attention, or to achieve the political ends of their promoters. When trouble breaks, the famous have no human rights, precisely because they are famous. They are superhuman in good times and subhuman in bad times. One actress is even in jail right now for reasons we do not fully understand.

People still adore the famous and they do beg for selfies in public spaces, but as a collective crowd, they are not as innocuous as they were before. They are not merely numbers in the follower count of Instagram or particles that orbit stars; they are a fluid dynamic mob with wounds and sentiments and opinions.

As the influential health evangelist and author Tim Ferris, who once was desperate to be famous, noted, “…you don’t need to do anything wrong to get death threats, rape threats, etc. You just need a big enough audience.”

Not long ago, there were things only celebrities could do. They stood on a pedestal and talked, and everyone listened, and when someone died, they conveyed their condolence because their words mattered to the grieving. But now, everyone has a platform, everyone is famous to five people; as a result, everyone behaves like a celebrity. They even convey their condolences to a departed public figure, even though no one cares for the “RIP” of the anonymous. But this new equality, a sort of hyper non-electoral democracy, has unconsciously made them look at proper celebrities as competition. So there is a huge segment of people, a consequential mob of inconsequential individuals who can be very dangerous to the famous, especially when real stars are in some trouble.

For the first time in India, the famous do not have power that is proportionate to their fame, even in their own domains. As filmmaker Anurag Kashyap pointed out a few weeks ago, there was a time when a doyen of the film industry could ruin a career; but no one has that sort of power anymore. As a result, it is very easy for the underdog today to look valiant and appear as if he or she is taking on the mighty, while in reality they face no substantial risks. And the easiest way for an incompetent government machinery to appear to be doing its job is to go after the famous—for drugs, sexual immorality or financial impropriety.

Just as the stars perceive their fans as a conceptual human swarm and not as individuals, the crowds today perceive the famous as a small swarm and not as individual humans, a small beautiful swarm that they have employed to entertain them at all times, and never offend through words or actions. As a result, every star is doomed to be political, forever a prisoner to his base.

Many generations of Indians have heard their parents say that the rich are unhappy. My mother used to tell me this pointing at passing cars, especially at women in sleeveless blouses. It was a lie. In fact, until recent times, it was a golden period for the rich. It was much cheaper then to be wealthy and what one got in return for being among the top 1% was a degree of luxury, influence, respect and debauchery that is extremely expensive today. Today, what fame can buy has depreciated much more than what wealth can buy.

The famous are, of course, rich. But their wealth is so often modest compared to their fame. Even so, this modest wealth is tied to their fame, as a result of which they seem trapped in a mildly abusive relationship with their base until they mercifully age and are cast away.

Today, the luckiest form of success is to be somewhat known only in your narrow domain, and be adored only by the class, community or club whose adoration matters to you. And amass wealth that is disproportionate to your modest fame.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





The kind of corruption that could do India a good turn


2020-10-04

As an Indian, I had many villains in my life, but the only ones I spoke to were autorickshaw drivers. As you know, they always demanded “extra over the meter”. So to annoy them, I would place ten rupees “over” the physical meter. I imagined that the middle-class fury at their attempt to fleece us was a reasonable moral response. Until I visited a first-world nation for the very first time—Japan. The taxi fare from the airport to the hotel was my week’s wage; public transport was many times more expensive than Indian taxi fare. And the simple truth occurred to me that auto fares in India were ridiculously low and designed to keep the driver poor to the advantage of people who were richer than him, and his overcharging was a natural compensation for an economic design flaw.

Something is wrong with what we think is right. Many of our moral expectations are absurd. Why did Indians flay Sachin Tendulkar for seeking a waiver on customs duties on a Ferrari he received as a gift when most of us also seek tax exemptions? Wasn’t the anti-corruption movement merely a war between bribe-takers and bribe-givers? Isn’t there something unconvincing about our own self-loathing over bribery, corruption or being “too broadminded” in other ways?

We have been trained to chant that all of India’s problems emerge from corruption. But the nation in plain sight tells us a very different story. That not all forms of corruption are the same, and some forms of it might even be beneficial. In an ideal world, there should be no corruption at all, but an ideal world wouldn’t have human beings.

In her book China’s Gilded Age: The Paradox of Economic Boom and Vast Corruption, Yuen Yuen Ang, who is a “political scientist”, says that there are four broad types of corruption. Petty theft, grand theft, speed money and access money.

Petty theft and speed money are committed by the non-elites, while grand theft and access money are monopolies of the rich. Petty theft is the corruption of low-level government officials and minor politicians. Grand theft is the much larger embezzlement of public funds by major politicians and powerful bureaucrats. Speed money is the bribe that citizens pay to access services that are meant for them. Access money, Ang says, are the “massive bribes” businesses pay to get lucrative deals, approvals and bailouts.

In India, we have been trained to believe that access money is the worst form of corruption because it entails huge amounts and involves the most powerful people. But, Ang argues, China has continued to prosper despite corruption because its primary form of corruption is access money. In fact, Ang says, access money is beneficial to economic progress. “While corruption is never good, not all forms of corruption are equally bad for the economy, nor do they cause the same kind of harm.”

Ang says that access money has locked China’s top bureaucracy in a competition to attract investment. A by-product of this system of greed is swift, wide and deep prosperity. Also, at times access money does not deny another person’s right to do business or disadvantage others. Often, it is a price paid for the creation of something new, which may not have existed otherwise. A refinery perhaps, or a bullet train venture. This is why Ang says access money, while harmful, does less harm than other forms of corruption.

Petty theft and speed money rob the poor, make civil rights and entrepreneurship costly, and give low-level officials a powerful motivation to continue this unfair system. Grand theft conducts this at a much larger level. But access money, Ang says, brings huge investments.

In any system that works, there is a role for a thug. The thug ensures order by getting rid of other thugs. When the power of the prime thug is ambiguous, it means the system is not working well. Government itself is a benign thug. In a well-governed society, the government, in return for protection money, protects people who in turn are happy to pay up in the form of taxes. Even in the universe of bribes, there is a system of thugs. A superior bribery system can abolish all other competing modes of corruption. The access-money system is that primary thug of corruption in China, as it motivates powerful officials to terminate other forms of corruption. This is why, Ang says, compared to India, China has very little petty theft, grand theft or speed money.

This present condition of China, she says, is very similar to the gilded age of the US, the late 19th century, when it graduated from chaotic forms to a higher form of corruption, the system of access money. Parts of that system were legalized.

Many things that a nation terms bad may actually be useful to it. Private enterprise, for example, during our destructive socialist era of economic idealism. In 2003, Arun Shourie, who has battled corporate corruption all his life, said that Indians should thank industrialists like Dhirubhai Ambani “not once but twice over” because “by exceeding the limits in which those restrictions sought to impound them, they helped create the case for scrapping those regulations, they helped make the case for reforms.”

India’s curse is that its access money system has not been able to abolish other forms of more harmful corruption. Across India, politicians and officials at lower rungs harm Indians through petty theft and speed money. Sophisticated politicians and officials who conduct grand theft or thrive on access money have not yet created order. In India, corruption is still in its chaos phase.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





The enduring absurdity of following our role models


2020-10-12

One night, in a villa in Gurgaon, the drinking session of a circle of friends entered the peacock phase, a standard chapter in a house party when one person begins to display a special talent and others then show theirs. Someone sat on the floor in a lotus position and rose without using her arms or knees. A woman who was surprised to find out she could not do that displayed her own superpower, which was to stay in plank position for several minutes. Two people then started swinging on their arms while seated. A man then showed he could do several push-ups. Seeing this, another guy started doing push-ups on the back of his palm. An amateur runner who could not do that without breaking his wrists wondered if he should challenge everybody to a long midnight run.

As you can see, everyone here displayed something almost exceptional their body could do because of long training or some physical anomaly, and they demonstrated their gifts as evidence of specialness. At a grander level, this is what “role models” do. Yet, those tipsy friends, like the rest of the world, take role models seriously.

The origin of their peacock chapter itself was in a recent tweet from one of India’s most famous role models—Milind Soman, who had posted a video clip of himself sitting on the floor with his legs folded and rising without any support but from the edges of his feet. This manoeuvre had found fame a few years ago after people with impressive medical degrees claimed that the elderly who can do it tend to live longer than those who cannot. Many old people then tried to do it, and injured themselves. What was merely supposed to be evidence of fitness among senior citizens soon became something that people worked on to achieve; a bit like what we do with aptitude tests. Many more will injure themselves after watching Milind Soman’s clip. This though will not be as destructive as the recent preening of a fitness simpleton who had posted a video of himself swinging an LPG gas cylinder around claiming it was an exercise. It was in reality the very opposite—an impressive way to injure your back and shoulders.

The world is filled with bad role models. A disenchantment of life emerges from this. People confuse what is impressive with what is truly inspirational. Every extraordinary person, or every person who can do one extraordinary thing, transmits two simultaneous messages, both erroneous. One appears humble—“You too can do it”—and the other is vain: “Why can’t you be like me”. This is at the heart of the advice industry’s perpetuity. Successful people offer advice without revealing or in ignorance of the overarching reason they are able to do that one thing. This overarching reason could be a physical anomaly, mental anomaly, or just genes. Millions who do not possess this crucial factor, without which the task is impossible, try to imitate success and fail; and then they seek more guidance, and are given more wrong guidance.

The absurdity of role models for physical health points to the kind of rubbish that goes on in the mental health and spiritual advice industries. A person with a particular mental condition sits on a pedestal and asks others to be like him, or to do what he does, and others who do not have his mental anomaly try in vain to achieve it, misunderstanding a mere fog for a mountain that they must scale.

A new documentary on “bad-boy” billionaires makes something about wealth clear to those who wish to see the truth—that, like in the case of exceptional athletic fitness, the overarching reason why some people become extremely wealthy cannot be imitated. They are simply scions of rich dads, or corrupt in ways that are not possible for most people, or just plain lucky. These are not virtues that a role model imparts. As a result, they impart only the virtues that usually form the second rung of reasons—like persistence and technical intelligence, which are useless without the overarching factors.

This is why good-boy billionaires could be worse role models than bad-boy billionaires. The unflattering paths to success of bad boys are exposed, but the paths of good billionaires are rarely known. Let us not forget many bad-boy billionaires were once good billionaires, who even spoke like role models about how to be successful.

Another group of highly influential but useless role models are wealthy underdogs. They hail from victimized segments of the society, but are mostly also from extremely wealthy households. Like African-Americans, Muslim migrants and others who are celebrated for facing “great odds”. It is not that the famous among them did not have to fight any battles; just that their success cannot be replicated by the other marginalized without an overarching factor—an exceptional head start provided by a very wealthy home. The lucky are not duds as stars; they are duds as role models.

So is there no such thing as a role model? Are all imitations of extraordinary people fated to fail? Can there be no inspiration at all? That is not true. Who then is a good role model?

A meaningful role model is usually never a star. He or she instead is a regular person who not merely shares your broad identity, like gender or culture, but also is in your exact hyper-local situation, an ordinary person with flaws who transcends his or her circumstances using ordinary and imitable qualities. A true role model thus is often someone who knows your name.





A practical reason why businesses should resist bullies


2020-10-18

One day a billionaire walked into a meeting of journalists. He guessed, correctly, that we were talking “something negative” and that we were, as usual, plotting the downfall of the government and the powerful. He then said, “Baniye ki moochh hamesha neeche hoti hai.” For those who don’t follow Hindi, an English translation will have no meaning. He’s not of the Baniya caste; he was using the word figuratively to denote India’s business class. And what he meant was that merchants are by nature more practical than courageous; that they never antagonize the powerful.

There is a general perception that the whole business spectrum, which includes industrialists, entrepreneurs, merchants and salaried executives, is given to being pragmatic instead of idealistic, amiable with authority instead of being confrontational, and compliant instead of being bold. This is why in the past few days, Tanishq, a Tata-owned jewellery brand, received much understanding, even sympathy, from perhaps millions of regular people after it withdrew a commercial to appease a mob. The commercial showed a pregnant Hindu woman in a Muslim household getting along with an affable Muslim mother-in-law. A small segment of Hindus objected to the commercial, claiming to be offended, though it is not very clear what exactly offended them, apart from the detail of a Hindu woman being married to a Muslim man. You may think there was a semblance of an argument. All of us do get angry now and then, and we try to dress it up in “facts” and other farces. But in this case, there is nothing worthy of mention. I am certain that if it was a pregnant Muslim girl in a Hindu household, there would have been no rage, though I cannot substantiate this unless there is another ad with such a plot line.

In any case, what happened was that even though Tanishq had done nothing wrong and it had only made a lame film about human love, it capitulated to a bunch of trolls. The brand’s reputation is intact because corporations and the rest of the business class appear to have a moral right not to stand up to bullies. This is a perception granted by people in general because those people in general work for corporations and are acquainted with the usefulness of practical retreats. They think that fighting for what is right at the risk of losses is something only a certain type of artist, journalist or activist does. In reality, it is this notion that is impractical and an affront to the wisdom of capitalism. All too often, practicality is a masquerade for poor analysis.

It is not hard to understand why most people give corporations a long rope. Companies have too much to lose. A small group of inconsequential people can harm them in ways that are disproportionate to their individual powers. Most brands gain nothing by acquiring a controversial image. Most products are about happiness and no company wants to remind its consumers of the unpleasantness of life. It is no coincidence that rebellion is the nature of people in low-paying professions or with low prospects. This also explains why arts students agitate more than engineering students, and why sons of poor men are more likely to rebel against their dads than the sons of rich men. Also, while India’s refined imitators of the West may bloviate about “institutions’, the fact is they never built any in the decades that they had tremendous influence. As a result, there is little that protects Indians who take cultural risks unlike, say, American companies and public figures who have exquisite freedoms. Also, people who seek freedom of expression are usually those who earn their livelihood from expression—so idealists are just small practical entrepreneurs like writers and filmmakers.

Even so, there is a reason why businesses should exhibit more cultural guts, why it is wise for the entire business community to resist bullies, and why entrepreneurs should behave like artists.

We do not need the abstraction of morality to do the right thing. Logic can show what it is. In most situations, if not all, we indeed know what it is. Often, there is only one right way, and a million wrong ways. A single right way is clarity, a million wrong ways is confusion. Sometimes idealism is the clarity of the single right way.

Freedom of expression is not entirely about entertainment, nor merely about the right to offend. In a society where storytelling does not have wide cultural freedom, where a mob can regulate it by claiming to be offended, the kind of people who become powerful are largely useless, even destructive, to the economy. In India, it is far easier for someone to get attention by raking up pointless issues than through ingenious civic administration. For the same reasons, it is very easy for mediocre artists and activists to gain attention, even an international reputation, by annoying a small mob.

When the bar is too low for cultural and activist charlatans to succeed through facile gimmicks, society as a whole is impoverished.

Also, in a world where the successful, the smart and the happy feel that they have too much to lose by standing up to bullies, the very idea of rebellion has been taken over by the down-and-out and the dejected. Anarchy is the day job of people with very little to lose. Every time a corporation capitulates to a bully, it not only empowers a small mob of cultural guardians, it also empowers future disenchanted foes of capitalism.

And yes, a free society does make better cinema.





Sacha Baron Cohen is the greatest prankster of our age


2020-10-25

In Borat Subsequent Moviefilm, a Kazakh prisoner enters the US to deliver a monkey to the American vice-president as a bribe. It is a film that is filled with reality.

In a “true story”, what is often true is a trivial thing called a plot, while it is filled with dramatized facts or lies; but in a great comedy, the plot may have never happened, but for it to work, it depends on reality, unlike easier things like films that are not funny.

This film is a sequel to the exquisite Borat: Cultural Learnings of America for Make Benefit Glorious Nation of Kazakhstan in which a man called Borat, played by Sacha Baron Cohen, pranked unsuspecting Americans. He went to the American heartland, stood in front of a huge rodeo crowd, praised president George W. Bush, the Iraq war, and sang what he claimed was the Kazakh national anthem to the tune of the American anthem. “Kazakstan is the greatest country in the world…,” he went, as the crowd grew restive. He even interviewed three women of the Veteran Feminists of America, assuming one of them was “an old man”.

I will not reveal much from the Subsequent Moviefilm beyond the fact that it further establishes Cohen as probably the greatest prankster of our times. He is an improbable prankster because he has all the trappings of an elegant bore. He is a handsome British aristocrat, who went to Cambridge; in short, he has the right antecedents to become a sanctimonious writer-activist. But then, that is what he is, and his greatness lies in the medium he has chosen—the comedy of real and fake pranks.

Pranks, when real, are closer to anthropology than most things that claim to be anthropology. In a prank, people react to a situation in ways that reveal a lot about their society and times. In Cohen’s Who Is America, a television series that appeared two years ago, he poses as a former Mossad agent and convinces an actual Republican member of the Georgia House of Representatives that ISIS terrorists are petrified of homosexuality and that their culture deemed them gay if a man’s buttocks touched them, so the best way for a man to defend himself against an ISIS terrorist is to run backward with a pouted rear-end towards the terrorist. The politician does exactly that in a drill as he charges at Cohen, who plays the role of a terrorist. But Cohen is not satisfied and he convinces the politician that he has to bare himself, and, as he charges backwards, scream “USA, USA.” Incredibly, the politician does that. The fake ex-Mossad agent also convinces former US Vice-President Dick Cheney to autograph a water bottle as a tribute to waterboarding, a form of torture that Cheney is accused of sanctioning.

In Who Is America, Cohen pranks Democrats, too, by posing as a handicapped interviewer to win their sympathy and time. In an interview with Bernie Sanders, he argues with him that Democrats should stop whining about the top one percent and instead include the other 99% in the top one percent, and proceeds to show how the math can be done as Sanders looks perplexed.

In an age when most documentaries, like The Social Dilemma, are propaganda masquerading as journalism, and the moral compass of literature has been taken over by posturing simpletons, Cohen’s pranks surpass them as anthropology, journalism and art, even as they make you laugh so hard that you fear your stomach will explode.

There is greatness in Cohen, not only as a prankster, but as an artist. He is, of course, protected by the great constitution of the US that lends him an exceptional degree of free speech and legal protection. Even so, he is courageous in doing what he does, because many of his pranks carry the risk of impulsive physical retribution. But his courage is most significant in his innate ability to debase himself: Few would dare parade themselves in a thong that even other thongs would find funny.

He is evidently a man who is not shy. In a certain sense, he is a perfectly shameless man. The shy are shy because they are so judgmental that they fear others may be as severe in their opinion of them as they are of others. So people who are incapable of shame are probably those who not only speak of freedom, but also grant others the freedom to be themselves.

Like any comedian of high quality, Cohen considers it his duty to make fun of all that is sacred. And powerful men, whom he does lampoon without mercy, are not as sacred as the entire spectrum of the unlucky. The poor and the handicapped, for instance. There is a common view among the pious of our times, the social minders who often tell us how to be, that making fun of the weak is not humour. But they miss the whole point. When a comedian derives humour from the miserable, he is not making fun of them; rather, he is making fun of the serious, noble people who will be offended.

Cohen often does slip into mediocrity, chiefly the ordinariness of sarcasm, a facile form of humour in which you say the opposite of what you mean to say. And many of Cohen’s pranks are not really pranks, but set-pieces played by paid actors, and it is somewhat crooked of him not to tell us which one is a real prank and which is mere cinema. Most of what he does is funny only because we presume they are real pranks.

Despite all that, Cohen is worthy of the world’s adoration. There is no doubt that he performs a very tough art—he tells us a story that is not about us at all, and despite our megalomania, we watch in a near trance. But his greatest gift perhaps is that when he is out pranking someone, he never laughs.





A theory on what possibly saves the rich from the poor


2020-11-01

How do the rich survive in a country that is vastly poor? There are several famous reasons. I wish to illuminate a little-known one.

There is a civil war going on among the poor. It is invisible because we do not look at the poor carefully. And this cold war inadvertently saves the rich from a violent end to their luck. At least for now.

We are trained to imagine many things on behalf of the poor. Most of them are wrong, as sociological conjectures often turn out to be. Like the myth that the poor “envy” the rich. The poor do have a grouse against the rich, but grouse is not envy. Just as you don’t envy Mukesh Ambani, the poor don’t envy you. Because envy is among peers. Envy is a consequence of equality. There is another related force that equality exerts, which is derived from the same complex strands of people sharing the same social plane: hatred.

Equals do thrive when they cooperate, but often economic and social equals compete for the same thin band of resources. This is why, outside academic and journalist rhetoric, in real-life situations, the poor seem to hate each other as much or even more than they do the upper classes. As in the case of envy, they may have a theoretical sense that they should hate the “big people” more, but they actually appear to direct this emotion at people who are very much like them.

Let me present what I see every single day in Gurgaon. Housemaids are stopped at the gates and harassed by security guards, who are usually malnourished men in paramilitary costumes from the same social and economic backgrounds as the maids. The guards have no one else to bully. Also, harassing is a form of flirtation. The only threats the maids face during their journey from their impoverished residences to their affluent places of work are from men and women who are a lot like them. Traffic cops are more likely to harass motorcyclists than owners of luxury sedans. All the bribes that the poor pay are to people from their own class or an economic rung not very higher than their own. The violent war between police and Naxals is in reality a war between the poor and the poorer.

The rich do harm the poor in invisible and complex ways, but the most visibly violent and unjust experiences of the nation are within various sections of the poor. This, in turn, has been one of the most under-appreciated reasons why the poor have not stormed the colonies of their masters.

Dalits are among the poor who have the clearest view of the elite as foes. Yet, even they face most of their visible daily injustices from their own. There are about a thousand recognized subcastes within the Dalit community, and the seemingly unavoidable Indian caste hierarchy is followed here. The top echelons of the community, like Vankars and Mahars, do not dine with or marry Valmikis and others who have traditionally been sanitation workers. Dalits thus seem to perpetrate the same injustices that they accuse upper castes of committing. This is inspiring the lowest of the low among Dalits to ask for reservations within the country’s quota for Scheduled Castes.

The poorest Dalit subcastes, which go by different names in different states, have long complained that elite Dalits have more or less cornered that quota. Some communities have prospered over the years because they had major social and economic headstarts, which made them unbeatable in the battle for reserved seats in colleges and reserved government jobs, which deepened the inequality between them and the rest.

Resources are finite, life is hard, and equals are rivals. This could be one of the reasons why in the 2019 general elections, the poor across north India were found to have largely voted for Narendra Modi, or his Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). Electoral analysts explain that this was because of Modi’s charm and sweeping “nationalism”. I don’t find these explanations convincing. It is unusual for upper classes and the poor to have identical views on almost anything except the two big fables of divinity and nationhood; so I feel there must have been a powerful selfish reason why the poor voted for a party that also seems the beloved of billionaires and millionaires. It could be possible that a poor majority had the impression that a minority group that is just as poor, or poorer, being subdued by nationalistic thugs emboldened by the BJP’s rise could reduce competition for jobs.

Violence against migrants and Muslims in India is often couched in a cultural war, but there is enough to suggest that it is about jobs and sharing meagre resources, too.

The rich, on the other hand, create resources. They are the employers of the poor. Yes, there are many aspects of their lives that are visually repulsive to the thinking, philosophical poor, but their view of the rich also includes their reformative roles— conscientious teenaged girls trying to teach the children of their maids and drivers; refined do-gooders trying to make lives better. I have met a man who started a free library in his Mumbai house for poor aspirants to the civil services; and an old lawyer who fought cases without charging a fee; and several doctors who treated the poor for free. These too are the optics of Indian life that the poor see every day. As a cultural bloc, the rich might seem villainous to an unknowable number of the poor, but compared to their own neighbours and equals, and even husbands and in-laws, the rich also appear more decent, nobler, more generous, nicer and safer to them.





What America’s vote tells us about the myth of influence


2020-11-08

These past four years, you may have heard that Russia helped Donald Trump steal the American presidential election in 2016. You may have heard this from such venerated figures that you may even think of it as an indisputable fact. There was no “Russian influence” this time, but the race was very close, and very similar to 2016’s. So what was all the noise about?

American voters have not transformed in these four years. Trump voters have largely remained so, and most of those who despise him or his party have not found a reason to like him. For years, Democrats have won the popular vote, and that has continued, but the new President, as in 2016, has won narrowly. If everything is almost the same, what exactly was the use of all that was done and said since 2016? What did all those impassioned writers, activists and demonstrators achieve?

That some people influence most people is one of our most influential ideas. This was true until recently. A handful of journalists, scholars and activists could influence vast millions. But the age of influence is over, and the US of 2020 presents further evidence.

People find the news they want to believe and the views they already subscribe to. We are in a world where prophets don’t create religions; rather, religions appoint prophets who have the right attributes. The influencer does not influence anymore; rather, the influencer is the mascot of an idea that has already taken root due to a complex web of economic, racial and psychological reasons.

We have moved from the age of influence to the age of corroboration. In public life today, success is a reward for figures who can validate a delusion, or a bias. People who are objective and do not have extreme views are doomed to be modest transmitters of ideas. They will be healthy for the world, of course, like boiled cauliflower, and as popular.

Yet, influence is a multi-billion dollar industry. It is a force that emanates from the long tail of politics, funding thousands of non-electoral politicians masquerading as journalists, economists, seers, patriots and humanitarians.

How do people arrive at a belief? We assume that people argue with themselves before acquiring it. We presume people consider various facts and opinions and make a Solomon-like judgment after hearing all sides. This is the most erroneous image we have of ourselves. The fact is we believe first and then seek arguments to substantiate that belief. In the older world, where a small bunch of elite males controlled the media, the influential could infuse both the belief and the arguments. But in a changed world, where hyper-democracy has created a wide spectrum of beliefs, the influential have been reduced to corroborators.

Even fake news is popular not because it is transformative, but because a section of society wants to believe it. As this column once argued, Trump did not succeed because of fake news; rather, a piece of fake news succeeded because of Trump. Conspiracy theories, too, exhibit this character. They do not infect everyone equally. Some people are prone to a particular kind of conspiracy theory that corroborates an entrenched belief, while others are immune to it. The immune feel intellectually superior, but they do not realize they are marinating in a different set of conspiracy theories. The most effective of these do not look like one—for instance, the theory that Russia stole the last US election. This theory was appealing to the old American mainstream media because it gave them an honourable reason why they had not anticipated a political revolution. Now a segment of America’s liberal media appears to concede that the Russian angle was overplayed.

In September, The New Yorker magazine ran an article titled, ‘Is Russian Meddling as Dangerous as We Think?’ “There’s nothing inherently foreign about the rise and spread of disinformation. Using the Russian word dezinformatsia doesn’t make the practice any different from homegrown falsehoods spread online by Americans targeting other Americans.” The article does not dispute Russian attempts, but dismisses their impact as inconsequential.

In a world where propaganda does not transform people the way it used to, and opinions appear to be innate and immutable, are political campaigns still relevant ? Intuitively, I cannot accept that there remains a person in the US who sees an ad or hears a speech or reads a piece of news and switches his or her political loyalty.

American campaign managers accept that their field of influence has shrunk significantly over the years. They say that their job now is to try influencing just a small fraction of the electorate who are impressionable because most voters are beyond transformation. But they claim that the millions of dollars that political parties spend on campaigns and influence is worth it because just a few thousand votes decide the fate of a presidential election. We will, however, never know how effective organized influence is on a few thousand undecided voters.

What is more influential than organized campaigns is banal hatred. You may argue that the influence industry peddles negativity, but discreet, private hatred is different from the broad conceptual hate that the influence industry sells. For instance, the hatred that many men harbour for articulate women like Elizabeth Warren, or for the trappings of sophistication. In the same way, many voters despise the sanctimonious intellectual so much that even when he or she says what is right, they develop an affection for the exact opposite.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Austerity is a useless trick in the world we now inhabit


2020-11-15

By the standards of furniture, the business class seat is an ugly and low-tech chair that serves as a mediocre bed, yet it has come to symbolize so much about good fortune, capitalism, extravagance and inequality. As a result, its renunciation by a person, especially one who can afford the seat, becomes a grand virtue. For instance, almost as famous as the co-founder of Infosys, N.R. Narayana Murthy, is the fact or fable that he travels economy class. But this chair, which I like very much by the way and consider the most meaningful thing money can buy, helps us understand our times. For instance, it reveals the impossibility of economic and social equality, and the simple hypocrisies of many activists who claim to fight for just that.

The former finance minister of Greece, Yanis Varoufakis, a Marxist who also appears to know what that means and an economist who became hugely popular by deploring the rich, said in a lecture delivered in 2013 that he had an epiphany at an airport when he was going somewhere to deliver a lecture on inequality. He was flying first class and zipping past long queues of tired people to his luxurious room aboard the plane. He lamented his privilege. Yet, Varoufakis did not perform a very simple task: Exchange his ticket with any of the economy passengers who were old or pregnant or just tired.

Articulation of the conscience is a beautiful invention of the intellectual class. Its main function is to let confessions and good thoughts compensate for hard sacrifice. Austerity in this class is an unconscious trick.

For many wealthy business families and politicians and activists, austerity has been a more conscious trick, a strategy. Even a form of tradition.

Why are the austere austere? What advantage does austerity confer? How closely is it associated with morality? Are people in unpopular professions more likely to project austerity? Historically, did the perceived austerity of communities like the world’s Jews, Rajasthan’s Marwaris or Kerala’s Syrian Christians save them from the adverse consequences of revolutions? Also, how is it that whole groups in this day and age continue to demonstrate this puzzling human behaviour—of denying themselves what their money can easily buy?

One of the important reasons why India’s old money has adopted overt austerity is to avoid provoking the poor. There is physical safety in that. But this is a useless trick today. Many things that appear austere to the rich are lost on the poor. For instance, driving a Skoda instead of a Mercedes, or hosting a small pastel-coloured wedding in a classy five-star hotel, may seem austere to you, but not to most Indians.

Austerity is not merely a tradition, but also a powerful habit. We have been influenced by the sleights of language to believe that tradition is on a grander and higher plane than habit, but habit is a vastly under-appreciated force. Tradition is something in the air, habit is in the body. Tradition that does not become habit is useless, and often a farce. Like the claim that Indians treat their guests like gods, and that Kerala is “a matriarchal” society. Often what truly unites a society is a handful of habits.

When we see it as a habit and not tradition, austerity is not so abstract.

Austerity a not absence of affluence. Austerity is a measure of a person’s economic behaviour relative to the spending habits of his or her economic peers.

Andrew Carnegie, one of the richest men who ever lived, said in his famous capitalist pamphlet, The Gospel of Wealth, “This, then, is held to be the duty of the man of Wealth: First, to set an example of modest, unostentatious living, shunning display or extravagance.”

This should make considerable sense to the rich, especially the rich in a poor country. There is something honest about extravagance as an expression, but it creates considerable ill-will.

The common public opinion in India that Vijay Mallya, the chief of the Bengaluru-based UB Group whose aviation venture named after a beer brand went belly-up some years ago, should be extradited by the United Kingdom to face charges here for defaulting on loans seems largely a contribution of his extravagance. He is, in actuality, a more substantial businessman than what he is portrayed as, but a lot of people found his apparently luxurious lifestyle repulsive for his limited-liability airline’s inability to pay its staff their full dues after it went bankrupt. Many in the middle class were upset that he could get away without repaying his debt, as they saw it, while most of them slogged to pay off their home loans. Vijay Mallya has become the mascot of an opinion that at the highest levels of capitalism, debt is a big scam. An austere businessman offers people a reassuring contrast.

Even so, as a trick, austerity is obsolete today. The poor despise symbols of money less than they hate symbols of refinement. Wealth, in theory, is achievable as it is seen as a physical quantity; hence, it is a not a caste. Class is the real caste.

In fact, most Indians are habituated to associate austerity with financial discipline, and financial discipline with the power of the upper classes.

Austerity is a thin surface of something deeper. The truly austere are not playing a game. They want to be this way. They cannot be any other way. Culturally, religiously, psychologically, they are compelled not to be extravagant. Very simply, they believe in austerity. The austere are a personality type.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





What the flaneur leopard says about urban migration


2020-11-22

I must first tell you about the leopard. A leopard is a townie. For decades, the scholarly view has been that the leopard wishes to be in the forest, and that it encroaches human habitats pushed by circumstances, like shrinking forests. There is a deeply set view among modern humans that the leopard “belongs” in the jungle and its forays into human settlements are acts of desperation or mistakes. So wildlife officials follow a standard practice: capture the leopard and release it into the wild. This is also known as a “rescue”.

But, a group of scientists who tagged some “rescued” leopards found out that the cats returned to the villages and towns, traversing considerable distances to be with humans, who tend to have an abundance of tasty dogs, cattle, children and other lumbering prey that are too lame for the forest, where even the deer puts up a hard fight.

The tagged leopards demonstrated that they not only liked human settlements, they often lurked only metres from homes.

Humans like to think that there is such a thing as a “natural habitat”. It’s a convenient anthropocentric view, hence has a religious tone to it—every animal has its place, close to humans if they are safe and far away if they are dangerous. According to this idea, wild animals belong in the forest. But the leopard has shown what humans demonstrated centuries ago—the natural habitat of an animal is any place that offers the best quality of life even if such a place harbours inherent risks, and that it will travel great distances to achieve it.

The behaviour of the leopard may have some lessons for the sophisticated. That not everything that is displaced is in need of a “rescue”. That, often what is actually being “rescued” is the rescuer. That a feral migrant to a town is not always a tragic figure. That, even though a city is not as ancient as a forest or humans, there is something natural about the idea of the city, that romanticizing the village is a pointless exercise.

People, including the poor, like to be where the action is. Mohandas Gandhi’s love for villages, and his wrong prediction that “the future of India” would be in its villages, frames a powerful feudal wish of generations of the Indian elite: They like to cordon off the poor and the provincial in sanctuaries, and they do this by telling themselves that a “sanctuary” is a form of paradise. Restricting the rustic poor to their poverty, modest farming and daily caste insults to fulfil some fantasy of the elite about village life is what India’s past has essentially been about.

But then, for decades India’s villagers, especially the poor whose lives are tough and whose social status is low, have wanted to migrate to the cities, where there are more opportunities and entertainment, and anonymity. Alarmed by this, a section of India’s elite has promoted a view that migration to the cities is a sign that something is wrong.

Migrating leopards also reveal a crucial aspect of violence against migrants. That an ethical idea may not be as important in keeping the peace as a practical politician acting in self-interest.

A few years ago, I went to meet some leopards in Junnar, a sugarcane district about 200 km from Mumbai. At the time of my visit, in 2002, leopards had attacked 22 people, mostly children, and had consumed nearly 700 cattle in two-and-a-half years. Nobody counted the dogs that had gone missing. The people in the region wanted the government to kill the leopards. The forest officials did what they were supposed to do — they captured the cats and released them into the forest. But the leopards kept returning, with friends and lovers. They loved the place. The sugarcane farms provided a good cover, and as it was one of the most irrigated places in the state, there was abundant water. And, of course, there were cattle and dogs.

The villagers wanted the leopard killed not only to save their own lives, but also to avenge past killings. But forest officials said they would protect the cats. They asked the villagers to grow sugarcane in patches to deny leopards vast cover. But then sugarcane is a lucrative crop and the farmers wanted to grow it on every inch possible. They were aghast that the government was going great lengths to protect the leopards. At the time, the compensation for a child’s death caused by a leopard was ₹20,000, and the penalty for killing the cat was ₹25,000.

Soon, politicians entered the arena. The Shiv Sena led demonstrations demanding the execution of leopards. India’s laws that protected the animals were exemplary, moral and wise. But the villagers who faced a threat every day were baffled. And politicians alone had the crudity to speak up for them. It comforted the villagers. And in the process may have saved the leopards from organized mass murder.

Leopards don’t vote, so most politicians don’t take their side. Yet, they continue to thrive in many human settlements across India. It is possible that a whole generation of leopards has never seen a forest; they were born in sugarcane farms or vacant hillsides near villages. In all such places, local politicians still speak the minds of villagers. As often happens in India, they may not have solved a complex issue, but they act as vents of anger so that it does not escalate into something worse.

Time and again, India encounters a man-woke conflict, in a manner of speaking. A highly ethical global idea, a sophisticated idea, infuriates simple people who have to bear its consequences. And politicians alone, in self-interest, say what is unsayable.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





The ambiguous heroism of the fabled Indian farmer


2020-12-06

Peace on the streets of India often means something bad has happened, like a riot or a pandemic. Otherwise, it is as though Indians feel that the absence of chaos, any form of it, is a surrender to someone who has won something. If you remember, before the pandemic turned the streets of Delhi unusually quiet, daily agitations and traffic jams had become the norm. They were an omen that political disquiet will be anything but quiet. Now that Indians are tired of the pandemic and appear to have decided that it is over, chaos has returned to Delhi in the form of agitations.

The farmer protest that Delhi has been witnessing is part of an extra-electoral phenomenon in which organizations that cannot compete against the Bharatiya Janata Party anymore at the polls convert a specific local disenchantment into a giant demonstration that halts normal life in the capital. Might this be India’s immediate future?

Today what these farmers, most of whom are landholders from Punjab, are protesting against are a set of agricultural reforms that will wean them away from guaranteed procurement of some of their produce by the government to an uncertain free market, where they will have to sell their crops in an open market. So, stripped of its frills, the current agitation is about a vast network of entrepreneurs in some regions of India looking to retain a socialist deal of procurement instead of facing the risk of free market.

Many of India’s future demonstrations will likely be around the emotions of farmers, whom Indians wish to misunderstand as a single collective. Indians have a complicated relationship with agriculturalists. This means Indians have a complicated relationship with most of their own. For Indians who are far removed from villages, who probably cannot survive in one for more than three days, like our newly conscientious film actors, fashion designers, young global humanitarians and others, there is something sacred about the farmer—his toil, his photogenic poverty, his rumoured suicidal nature, and the fact that he grows food.

But the typical Indian farmer is far more interesting. Many of his actions arguably fall in a morally grey zone.

Much of India’s evil radiates from the ways of the Indian village, its traditions, its pettiness, and its “narrow mindedness”, as B.R. Ambedkar put it. As a villager, the farmer is at once a victim and perpetrator. In his role as village patriarch, he is given to playing the curator of caste discrimination, arranging to beat up lovers and denuding and parading women who attempt to elope. Urban India is largely the creation of Indians who fled the miseries of their village. Their urbane scions now, to whom a village is something almost pretty they cross on a highway, have nothing to lose when they say with pious intensity that the Indian farmer is a sacred being. “The hand that feeds us” has taken the place of the inane urban chant that was vacated by “the spirit of Mumbai”.

The farmer is not sacred to all, of course. There is another class of Indians who have disdain for him because his farm is heavily subsidized by the government; in agrarian belts of India, his crops are bought at a guaranteed price through public funds, his electricity and water are subsidized, and he pays no direct income tax on his agricultural income. An ongoing attempt of thousands of wealthy Indians is to somehow qualify as farmers and show a portion of their income as agricultural in nature. About 10 years ago, news broke that India’s most famous actor, Amitabh Bachchan, had declared himself a farmer.

The Indian farmer may burst out laughing if you ever told him this, but it is hard to morally defend agriculture today. The most profitable and subsidized crops in India—wheat, rice and sugarcane—are a direct cause of diabetes, our most threatening illness. These crops are widely perceived as “essentials”, but are in reality inessential, like many things India deems “essential items”. We can have tasty, healthy meals forever without any grain or sugar, if only we liberate ourselves from their addiction.

Also, these crops consume huge amounts of fresh water. When people look at a vast field, they believe they are seeing a part of nature. But a field is the exact opposite—it is a factory that sucks up fresh water and sprays in chemicals, but yes, it does look green.

The moral ambiguity of agriculture comes from its power over us. It makes a type of food that has won the country’s cultural war. The way lovers of tradition talk about food, you would think the foods of the world are all different. They are, on the surface, but all of their power comes from a deep cultural trait—addiction to carbs.

For decades, two sets of people have been trying to “rescue” the Indian farmer. New capitalists seem to want impoverished farmhands and farmers to be cheap workers in factories or security guards in urban residential colonies. The other set would have them remain farmers, preserving for everyone else an ancient way of living. But then urban politicians have not been able to create sufficient industrial jobs, and India’s career do-gooders have not been able to alter the doom of small-patch farming.

Although science has offered solutions through genetically modified crops, they have systematically defamed the science of genetic engineering, a major success of activism that has not been diminished even after over a hundred Nobel laureates signed a letter stating that genetically modified food is safe to eat.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





How ugly public spaces could work to reassure people


2020-12-13

When the government recently revealed the design of India’s new parliament building, Indians debated its beauty. But they did not ask an important question. Did the government wish to achieve beauty? Symbolism, yes; safety and economy, of course, but beauty? The thing is, it is actually very rare for India to consider beauty an important factor in the design of a building, or even a town. Provincial India, which also rules the country to a significant extent, somehow accepts that temples and other religious places should be primarily beautiful, but not other kinds of buildings.

From an aesthetic point of view, India today is where Indians where until recently with respect to tourism—they needed the excuse of God and pilgrimage to spend money on the fun of travel. Without God, modern India is a bit lost about architectural beauty. The country seems unconvinced that it should spend immense amounts of money on spectral secular beauty.

I once saw the newly-built head office of a fellowship of patriots. They had worked hard to make it look hideous . The brief to the architect must have been “Make it modern but Indian, and atheistic”. The result is an irregular thing whose ground floor has large rectangular glass windows, and the floor above has contiguous arches like the gums of a toothpaste model. There are slim pillars here and there. As the building is not colonial or Hindu or Islamic, or beautiful in other ways, it is familiar to most Indians who pass by as a place that is contemporary. Much thought goes into the ugliness of our great republic.

As this column had once argued, most nations in plain sight try to look richer than they are; India in plain sight is a lot poorer than what it is in reality. And this modern spatial ugliness of India performs an important function.

It reminds most Indians that the nation belongs to them. This is similar to the effect of street chaos and our general civic disorder—millions who hail from chaotic places, who only know chaos and the absence of order, are not alienated. Except for some exquisite metropolitan services, like the Delhi Metro, India’s public spaces truly belong to India’s public. They feel they can do almost anything and get away.

Urban order is a form of intelligence, but it also creates a sense of loneliness, a kind of structured gloom. For instance, when an affluent nation solves its urban congestion, it does so by creating vast infrastructure that hides humans—by distributing people across so many broad streets that the human element on every lane is thin, or by putting them in safe swanky trains under the ground or in covered walkways. The idea is not to hide people; however, it is the by-product of a good city plan.

The disorder of India should not be venerated. It kills thousands every day and causes unspeakable misery to the poor. Even so, like the industry of electoral politics, it does contribute to peace between the classes. The persistence of India’s poverty, its chaos, its mismanagement, and the sheer ugliness of its public spaces ensure that nobodies do not feel like foreigners in their own nation.

Grand symbols of progress, like giant cable-stayed bridges and grand exquisite buildings, have vast uses, but they also contribute to disharmony in society, for they visually emphasize the failures of the unlucky. For instance, imagine how the poor of western Europe might feel in the spectacular urban beauty of its great cities. You are in Paris, say, and broke, gloomy and jobless, then you walk into a spectacular lane. I think you will feel more broke, gloomy and jobless.

The poor in a rich country are like a bitter Twitter page trapped in Instagram, where everyone else is beautiful and having a good time. Even though a majority there have access to a quality of life in public places that is superior to that of millionaires in India, they probably harbour the disenchantment of being surrounded by the exquisite .

India, on the other hand, makes even tech look ugly by promoting it as science that has no good reason to exist if it is not helping some poor farmer check the prices of crops. India even made rocket science boring in an age when rocket science was hot—by chiefly pitching satellites as a welfare programme for farmers. This way, India’s space programme did not infuriate the poor.

It is not only India’s poor who feel a connection to India through its spatial chaos; it is also ordinary Pakistanis.

About 18 years ago, when I visited Pakistan, I could see that most ordinary Pakistanis did not have a grasp of what India really was. One evening in Peshawar, a conservative, bearded 20-year-old Pakistani boy barged into my hotel room. I thought, like many Pakistanis before him, he wished to bore me with claims of neighbourly brotherhood. But he had only one thing to say, a question: did girls in Bombay really dance the way they did in Hindi films?

A common view in Pakistan of India was that it was more fun, more decadent and glitzy. But these perceptions did not make them grow fonder of India. They admired the supposed successes of modern India, but not India itself. What they found appealing about India were the unflattering qualities I mentioned that made India resemble Pakistan, a nation that was still poor and whose public spaces largely belonged to the poor, where politicians were corrupt, bridges collapsed and trains fell into rivers.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





The loss of a primordial human gift is stifling Indians


2020-12-20

Like birds are meant to fly, we are meant to speak. Yet, we have made that hard. To say what is on our minds was our primordial gift. How odd, then, that “speaking your mind” has become a special form of speech, as though there are other competing ways of speaking.

Over the past few years, speaking one’s mind has become difficult for Indians. This has also been a period when people who never had a voice have appeared to be highly expressive. But I am talking about a class of popular individuals who have a lot to lose by speaking their minds. They cannot say everything they wish to. And they do not belong only to expressive fields, like the arts, journalism and academics. It is a situation also faced by corporate executives, scientists, athletes, cricket commentators and others who feel that they cannot say anything of substance anymore without someone somewhere taking offence. There is this suffocation of Indians. It is not new for people to be ‘offended’, but as an organized festival with joyous rewards, it is new.

No central authority controls this suffocation. When it all began, there were shadowy strong men strangling the media and artists, but today it is vast and self-administered.

Maybe it was easy to silence India. Most Indians do not believe that others have a fundamental and absolute right to say anything; so they regulate their own expression. They are not baffled by their own strangulation.

It can be argued that the importance of freedom of expression is over-represented in the media and the arts. After all, its common champions are all people who earn a living or profitable respect from this freedom. Like artists and activists, assuming there remains a difference. They are entrepreneurs whose very raw material is expression. But then, even they take care to suffocate themselves and not offend powerful people in their own domains. For instance, a humanitarian-opinion writer may consider it easier to offend a top Indian leader than the editor of an American newspaper.

This is similar to the situation of corporate executives just a few years ago, when India was a much freer place for political expression. People who never dared to antagonize their human resources department, who meekly accepted dress codes and restrictions on lipstick shades and office behaviour, felt free to make scathing attacks on the prime minister. Maybe, our wish to do well in life requires lessons in losing our freedom in return for material rewards. Generally, people have always tended to be cowards in places that actually matter to them.

So what is remarkable about the on-going suffocation is that we are today impelled to exercise restraint in areas wider than our own domains—people are worried about voicing a thought in front of neighbours, in a train, ordering certain dishes in a restaurant, passing a scientific opinion about race, and even liking a tweet. The bar for being “outspoken” has fallen very low.

Like many things in India, freedom is an ambiguous thing. What is a joke on Monday can get you arrested on Tuesday. When I used to be the editor of a weekly magazine, I never had a clear idea about what I could legally get away with—except the vague notion that every good story is defamatory in nature, and nudity is generally construed as vulgar, unless depicted as postulations of the Kamasutra.

The freedoms that the Indian media enjoys are not enshrined in Nehruvian generosity, as people imagine. I have a theory about why Indian news media has been so free for so long. It comes from reporting election campaigns. As politicians made wild statements about other politicians, especially the most powerful people in the nation, the medium that reported them successfully conveyed the impression that it enjoyed a high level of freedom. But now that the monopoly of organized journalism over factual media is over, politicians and other powerful people no longer grant it exceptional freedoms.

This general suffocation is not special to India. There is a wide range of things Americans and British public figures cannot freely state. Not even: “Gender is a biological fact, and not something imagined.” These two nations have vast liberties, but influential people, who have extreme notions about decency and what hurts “others”, have found ways to negate these liberties through excessive self-righteousness. Today, cancel culture is so prevalent and frivolous in the United States that I feel an American intellectual who has never had a talk or paper cancelled by a students group should be embarrassed.

A few days ago, news broke that a book on cancel culture itself was cancelled. Welcome to the Woke Trials by Julie Burchill appears to be about self-righteousness as a new mental disease, but its publisher, Little, Brown, decided not to publish it following accusations that the book was “Islamophobic”, a characteristic that its editors somehow missed before activists informed them.

What is the future of this suffocation? Is it a new habit? Will people who wish to do well become more careful, and will freedom be left to those who have nothing to lose?

Freedom of speech will eventually thrive not because of its innate power, but because of the nature of the forces against it. The more speech is oppressed, the lower the bar for what qualifies as interesting, and in this world, there are always material rewards for being interesting. And with material rewards come people who seek it. Suffocation, after all, makes it exciting to breathe.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Some ordinary learnings from an extraordinary year


2020-12-27

It is unusual for people to despise an even number, like 2020, that too a number that is divisible by 10. But then a disease that became a pandemic this year affected all. As this extraordinary year comes to an end, here are some lessons.

One, humans get used to the extraordinary. In the film District 9, some aliens land on Earth. Humans are stunned. But the most intelligent part of the film is what happens after the initial shock. People quickly get used to the aliens; they even successfully draft some of them into prostitution.

The world’s initial response to the pandemic was extraordinary. Whole nations shut down. Hyperbolic writers claimed the world had changed “forever”. (One sentence no writer has written in any language is, ‘We live in very ordinary times’) But then ordinary people demonstrated that the conjecture of District 9 was correct; they cannot live in marvel for long. Nothing remarkable can endure as remarkable, for endurance itself is the very opposite of remarkable.

Two, we actually like people. We live in an age in which hating people appears to be a form of intelligence. Most of our ideas that have triumphed in any field have one common principle at their core: Keep your opinion of people low, and you will get them right. The lower your opinion of people, the more mainstream you become. We complain not only about the minds of others, but also about their bodies, their very presence, which we call congestion.

Yet, when our pandemic emptied out roads, cafes, malls, offices and theatres, we could see clearly what strangers meant to us—they were the extras in the film starring us; human strangers are the backdrop without whom our movie is dull. We like people, especially those we do not know at all.

Three, too much of family is plain misery.

Four, the rich have to invent reasons to feel low in a poor country that has a high threshold for what constitutes misery. In the slow rot of the pandemic, India’s balcony-people felt the half-gloom of being stranded. It was not quite depression, but some sort of sorrow nevertheless. But all around them was proper despair. The poor were starving and jobless, and many were walking hundreds of miles to reach their homes. And the balcony-people felt too sheepish to express their own half-gloom. They had to invent more respectable terms, and causes, to justify their sorrows. In this way, through a rare juxtaposition of misery and mere melancholy, the pandemic demonstrated that many labels for sorrow could emerge from the need of balcony-people for grand sociological or medical reasons to feel low in a nation where there is more substantial misery all around.

Five, self-interest is the best form of humanitarianism. India revealed a strange quality during the pandemic. It seemed to care; it really did not want people to die, not even the poor. This is a mystery because India has very low standards for life. Every day, thousands of people die on roads, on railway tracks, and in factories and schools for trivial reasons. Yet, when it came to battling covid, India had high standards for Indians. The reason was that the pandemic first came to India with the reputation of being an old-men killer. As various aspects of India, including your housing society, are run by elderly men, they reacted very strongly to the virus, which inadvertently resulted in a string of humanitarian measures.

A more complex form of self-interest that influenced the global response is evident in this brief history. First, China responded to a mysterious disease by enforcing an extraordinary lockdown of a large part of its territory. Then, American tech billionaires who had high esteem for China and who are more terrified of death than most people (because they have good reasons to live till 200) promoted a lockdown as the most intelligent solution. Soon, there were two distinct tech-billionaire views. Those who were in software and stood to benefit from the pandemic, like Mark Zuckerberg, said lockdown was humanitarian. Those who were also in hardware, like Elon Musk, whose factories were shut, said opening the economy was humanitarian.

Six, intellectuals in general are untrustworthy salesmen. The pandemic showed that science is emotional, or at least the process of science is emotional until truth eventually wins. Intellectuals and others who advised us seemed influenced more by their politics more than the pursuit of truth. They were not crooks; they simply had no choice but to trust the ideology that gave them tenure, money, compliments and respect.

Many strongmen across the world loved the idea of lockdown because they loved China and shutting down stuff. But US President Donald Trump and British Prime Minister Boris Johnson were reluctant because they worried about the economy. Thus, intellectuals in the US and Britain, who despised their strongmen, supported the lockdown. Any scholar who mentioned the words “economy” or “herd immunity” was publicly humiliated. They even flayed whole nations, like Japan and Sweden, which did not take their advice on locking down.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi was on the side of a lockdown, a sudden surprise one (“Saathiyon….”). Thus, Indian intellectuals supported opening the economy.

Seven, India fails its poor because it treats its poor as poor. Instead, when it comes to health and transport, India should treat its poor as though they are rich. Some services in some states have already shown that India has the money to do so.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Purpose may not be as important as it’s made out to be


2021-01-03

In Pixar’s new film, Soul, a man who has found purpose learns that there is more to life than purpose, like sunshine, temperate weather, falling leaves, the children of other people passing by, and junk food. In other words, he learns that the best thing about life is life itself, its banality, which includes commuting, traffic and queues.

People across the world are celebrating the film, as though it has illuminated a bleak year. Soul has transmitted what millions wished to feel—a release from the oppression of purpose, its sacredness. People are tired of meaning, goals, grand ambition, and of hoping and trying, and of premonitions of defeat. They, of course, know that a film cannot liberate them from the inevitability of purpose. Just that they are glad someone denounced it for them.

In Soul, ethereal forces create all human personalities long before people are even conceived. The film does give “a scientific explanation” for such a deterministic universe using theoretical physics. These days, if you use “quantum” in your language, you can spout any nonsense. But that is not the intent of Soul. The purpose of the film is to rejoice the pointlessness of life.

For most of human history, people were not required to have purpose. How then did purpose become so important in modern life? Why did the joy of an aimless ordinary life become a matter of shame?

I have a theory. Purpose was marketed. And it was marketed by its most powerful brand ambassadors—people who had purpose. The history of purpose is the same as the history of influence. A handful of people who had a talent, or a complaint, or a fiery madness acquired a sense of purpose, and they infected everyone with idea that life should be headed somewhere. People with purpose are highly persuasive. For instance, take this exquisite and powerful exhortation by Mahatma Gandhi: “Find purpose, the means will follow.”

But most people in this world do not have talent, grouses or insanity; as a result it is hard for them to find purpose. And they begin to feel something is wrong with them. Or worse, they expose themselves to hell by imitating the purpose of some grand people.

Even the few who have found purpose do not always enjoy being this way. The long road to their goal is dreary. This path is given heroic names—like tough, lonely and painful. You may even imagine ‘dreary’ is a heroic thing. But the perfect word to describe the path might just be ‘boring’.

The feats of the greats in all fields belie the dreariness of the process. In science, too.

“Science is boring,” writes Michael Strevens in The Knowledge Machine - How Irrationality Created Modern Science. Many of us who see only the beauty of the ideas and insights are blind to the long years of “tedious laboratory labour”. I am yet to read Strevens’ book, as it is not easily available here, but I would like to share these lines: “The single greatest obstacle to successful science is the difficulty of persuading brilliant minds to give up the intellectual pleasures of continual speculation and debate, theorizing and arguing, and to turn instead to a life consisting almost entirely of the production of experimental data.”

In a just world, purpose promises us something known as “recognition”, which is the broadcast by a few scholars that you are very good at what you do. Is this worth the gruelling process? And what after the recognition?

In Soul, a musician who understands that “music is just an excuse to bring out the you”, still craves glory. And one day, his wish comes true. He enjoys the adulation and the justice of it all. And he asks, ‘what next’? His idol tells him that he will experience experience adulation again tomorrow, and again and again. In that way, the very fulfilment of an ambition becomes as dreary as a daily commute. People in his position then seek something greater.

The more they succeed, the more clearly they see a better place that has its doors unjustly shut to them. As a result, most successful people, too, have a sense of failure. In my life as a reporter, I have never met a celebrated public figure who did not have a sense of defeat, barring Sachin Tendulkar, but then he was at his peak when I met him. I am certain that even Tendulkar feels defeated today by the question, ‘what now’?

In the human hierarchy of reasons to live, purpose has primacy. Its stature could have given us joy if only we had not required purpose to contain a certain grandness. Most people have reasons to exist, important reasons, but not grand reasons. And they begin to suspect that they are frivolous, that they have wasted their lives “doing nothing”.

In the four languages that I can understand, evangelists of purpose provide the sense that people need to “find” their purpose. This implies that purpose is a set of things, of a certain sanctity, that these seers themselves have “found”. I think it is bad language. Purpose should not be something people should try to find in a pool of great pursuits”. Instead, it is something that people need to invent for themselves.

If purpose is the pursuit of meaning alone, then most people have it. They may have “found” it or invented it, but they have it. They live for their children, or for other forms of love, or for sex and other lesser pleasures. All these give people direction, a sense of movement, a reason to live, something to save them from the rot of having it too easy, and motivation to survive the sheer length of life.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





The future of the masses in a rapidly changing world


2021-01-17

A few days ago, when a mob of Americans invaded their legislative building, everyone said it was “unthinkable” a few years ago. But, when we say that an event that has occurred was “unthinkable” once, does it only mean that we are not very good at thinking? Or that something truly extraordinary has happened that has fundamentally altered human nature?

The attack on the US Capitol corroborated a notion that many people have—that other people have become more stupid, more insane, and more dangerous. Across the world, the type of people who used to have a clear idea of a majority as a single bloc feel the quality of the masses has deteriorated.

What really is going on? What is the future of the masses ? What is the most logical outcome of a world where ordinary people who used to toe the line of rulers have begun to behave in extraordinary ways?

What we have seen in the past five years is nothing compared to the things that will occur. In the future, the masses will behave in even more extraordinary ways. It will all be “unthinkable”, especially for “thinkers”. I do not believe that people have transformed. Just that today they are more empowered to be themselves. An omen of what is to come lies in a seemingly unrelated fact—in some aspects of life, there is no such thing as the ‘mainstream’ anymore.

The disappearance of a coherent mainstream in politics, entertainment and culture should tell us that the masses already are not a single collective organism that can be influenced by a different class. As melodramatic as this may sound, for the first time since the invention of ‘class’, the few have lost control over the most.

The film Wag the Dog begins with a question: “Why does a dog wag it’s tail?” An answer then appears: “Because the dog is smarter than its tail. If the tail were smarter, the tail would wag the dog.”

In the film, the American president’s spin doctor assigns a Hollywood producer to create a fictional war to distract the population from a sex scandal. The film is correct in presuming that a handful of people can fool or influence most people, and that this has been the basis of all social order and civilization. What the film did not know then was that the whole theory of morality itself was wrong—the presumption that a sex scandal was a president-killer. That the American president has to be a very decent person was merely a journalistic opinion of the most influential of journalists in America, and not a fact, as the subsequent rise of Donald Trump would demonstrate.

The majority in any society thinks very differently from the elite. In fact, the very definition of ‘the masses’ should have been a group of people who cannot be analysed correctly by the elite. Even so, until recent times, the monopoly that the upper classes had over the entire spectrum of transmission of news ensured they could still influence the majority. Now, all this has changed.

What exactly is mainstream? It is a large body of humans thinking or loving or doing things in a certain way that benefits a small group of people. So it is natural that the collapse of influence will also make the mainstream vanish.

To fully understand the meaning of this disappearance, let us look at areas where the vast mainstream of monoculture exists—diet, nationalism and religion. The mainstream diet across the world, which is very old, has endured on account of the human addiction to named and nameless sugars, and because of food subsidies that make these cheap to mass-produce. Nationalism, which was invented to lower the cost of war by replacing expensive mercenaries with men who had a sense of identity, has endured as a habit because a nation is primarily a habit. All major religions are co-options of ancient factions by an influential elite that have endured because religion too is a habit.

Such a mainstream, filled with diverse people who were conditioned to think and act alike, existed in politics, culture and material aspiration. But those mainstreams are now dissolving. Even nationalism is taken over by the factions of religion or language. Religion itself is becoming subordinate to caste and race. In the future, religion might be a mere philosophy, and caste and race the actual religions.

There is an interesting question we should ask about the mob that attacked the Capitol: Were they few or were they many?

Some argue that the mob represents mental illness more than the US population; that they do not even represent Trump supporters. This could be true, but it should not comfort us. Mobs are a peculiar kind of modern faction present in every society today. They grow out of mainstream politics but are too extreme to be controlled by the majority. They have the motivation, grievance and insanity to storm the citadels of our civilization. There have always been great rewards for melodrama and the flouting of decorum. The left has been demonstrating this for years through its hyper-moral activism that uses fake news to create fear—as in the case of agitations involving Greenpeace and against genetically modified crops.

In a world where the mainstream is fragmenting, what is the future of vast nationalistic organizations like the Bharatiya Janata Party and national leaders like Prime Minister Narendra Modi? In politics, you win when you are the first choice of a majority. But there is another way of winning—when a society is so splintered that there are thousands of local heroes, but you are the second-best choice of most.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Two sacred theories of cricket that have long endured


2021-01-24

India’s melodramatic triumph in Australia has reinforced two bad cricket notions. One is that captaincy is an important element in the sport. The other is that dull, laborious and circumspect batting, the craft of Cheteshwar Pujara, and Rahul Dravid before him, is a form of genius.

These two ideas might seem unrelated, but they are connected by their hidden lure—a tribute to ordinariness.

In sports, spectacular individual talent hogs all the attention, but on some days, the commoners achieve extraordinary results. And when that happens fans love it because in the triumph of the ordinary they see the glory of the regular guy, like them. And they then convey that exaggerated compliment, “He’s a team player.” Across many sports, the spectacular player is often ‘selfish’ and ‘not a match-winner’, while the unspectacular player is often ‘a team player’, a great captain, and even selfless, hardworking, nice, loyal, sober and humble. It is, after all, a world where the lousy story of the hare and the tortoise has endured down the ages.

This is at the heart of the enduring legacy of Dravid, and the giant statue that is being built of Pujara, who faced more than 35 overs by himself to make 56 runs.

Not for a moment am I suggesting that plodders who survive on the cricket pitch for long durations are not as effective as more spectacular players. Their endurance tires bowlers out and slowly deprives the cricket ball of potency. My argument is not against their worth, but the misunderstanding of why are they are so effective. Their value emerges not from genius, but from its absence. They are able to endure because they do not try to do too many things with the bat because they can’t; they do not have a wide range of strokes. A Virat Kohli, like Sachin Tendulkar or Brian Lara before him, has too many answers to every ball. His genius is a perpetual call to action, and in this action lies the risk of dismissal.

As in life, so in cricket, endurance isn’t a talent, but a consequence of being unspectacular. The exaltation of endurance is primarily an intervention by intellectuals in sports analysis. Common fans only react to what is exciting. They may like a good underdog arc, but it needs to be entertaining. This sort of objectivity is repulsive to the intellectual, who needs ambiguity to have something to say. For this he leans on class and aesthetics. But in the intellectual, too, exists a tortoise. And so in players who do not have aesthetic beauty, the intellectual then finds another ambiguous thing—grit. This adjective appears many times in paeans to limited batsmen like Nasser Hussain, Steve Waugh and Dravid, and now to Pujara, who took some body blows in Australia.

Grit is often a private compulsion that has the appearance of heroic service. Like how a serious poet who is incapable of writing a racy thriller acquires the stoic image of an artist who has refuted the rewards of commercial success.

When athletes acquire ambiguous titles like ‘gritty’ or ‘team player’, they automatically become political figures. And that is what unspectacular players in all sports usually become. When fans vote for the cricketer they consider the most valuable, it is never a Tendulkar or Lara who wins. It is usually a Dravid or a Mahendra Singh Dhoni. This leads us to the second bad theory that India’s triumph in Australia has made more sacred than it already was.

After India won the Test series, former cricketers, professional commentators and those come free celebrated the captaincy of default captain Ajinkya Rahane, and denounced the general leadership of Kohli, who had left the series midway to be close to his newborn.

The denunciation of the leadership of a player of Kohli’s calibre is familiar. The world has a confused relationship with the spectacular. Fans love them, but are disenchanted by the unattainable stature they themselves have granted. And they then elevate the unspectacular through subjective means, like cricket captaincy. In recent times, a player who is considered a great cricket captain is seldom a genius and always ‘a team player’ or gritty or has other dubious attributes, like ‘cunning’—consider Waugh, Sourav Ganguly, or Dhoni.

As a result, many cricket sides have two distinct figures—a player who has the highest stature, and the captain. And that is fertile ground for politics. The exaggerated place of a captain emerges from an erroneous sacred opinion that cricket is a team sport. This when at any given moment in cricket, only an individual is engaged, except during a run. Yes, yes, there are strategies and tactics, and things done in tandem, but they are all subordinate to the fact that every game is a string of individual feats.

Many things a captain does are banal. Like placing the field and rotating bowlers. The more substantial actions involve exerting influence in picking players, communicating with players and the management, analysing problems and making others accept the analysis. Here, a player with the highest stature is often more influential than the captain. It would be naive to imagine that Tendulkar lost any influence over team composition or his teammates after he lost his captaincy.

But there was a month, I remember, when the outcome of a whole tournament was influenced by the stature of a captain who was not the best player in his side. It was the 1992 World Cup, when 39-year-old Imran Khan led an inexperienced team to victory. But usually, a cricket captain is merely the world’s rebuke to a spectacular genius.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





How to choose a moral stand on the farmer agitation


2021-01-31

A moral position is an opinion that is somewhat more moral than the person who claims it. It is usually formed after a cursory understanding of agreeable facts or borrowed from agreeable people. A moral stand is thus usually very easy to take. It costs nothing. Yet, the ongoing farmers’ agitation has not supplied a clear moral stance to the country’s urban mainstream. The past few weeks, I have often heard people in need of an opinion ask people who have opinions, “What do you think of the farmers’ protest?” The seekers then listen, but in the end, they are still not sure.

I am not talking about consumers of ideology, people who form the long tails of politics, either ‘left’ or ‘right’, and are conditioned to delude themselves into taking a prefabricated moral stand seconds after any news breaks. I am referring to most regular people.

At the heart of the matter, there are three new laws that intend to transform how farmers do business and how the government does business with farmers. And there is a section of farmers who hate and fear these. What can be so perplexing about this?

The reason for the moral confusion is that the laws make a lot of sense. The sense is on paper, but then laws are always on paper. The trouble is that the branding of farmers as impoverished victims is so strong in India that the instinct of the conscientious urban class is to take their side.

What must you do then? Let this column help you form your moral stand. The most important factor in its formation is not the nature of the issue, the farce of pros and cons, or other ritual arguments. What matters is your nature. Who are you?

Have you done well in the past five years? Or have you done poorly? Are you more privileged than your parents, or have the other Indians caught up with you after your early head start? Do you secretly or overtly feel you are genetically superior and that you belong to a genetically-superior race or caste? Or do you feel more racially modest? Do you feel very healthy, lucky and rich, and confident that your future too will be this way? Or do you feel shaky and vulnerable ? Do you feel it is very cheap to be upper middle class in India? Or do you feel it has become very expensive to be part of the elite in India? Do you feel your religion and mother tongue are your home, or do you feel more at home in Manhattan, London or Paris?

In essence, in a political field, at any given situation there are only two kinds of people. Those who feel smug, and those who feel nervous about their own circumstances.

If you are smug, it will be easier for you to take the side of the government and its attempt to reform agriculture. And your argument should run like this:

The new laws liberate farmers from the monopoly of Agricultural Produce Market Committee mandis, the only places in several Indian states where a farmer who grows some of the most popular crops can legally sell his produce. But the new laws free the farmer to sell his harvest to anyone he wishes anywhere, even online. The biggest losers are middlemen who connect farmers with mandis for a commission, and the state governments that earn thousands of crore on licence fees for running these statutory wholesale markets. No wonder then that big agricultural entrepreneurs, many of them politicians, are behind the agitation. As it happens so often in India, street rebels are merely cheap recruits of the rich.

Also, the new laws do not abolish the guarantee of minimum support prices (MSPs) for crops that were once deemed essential. The fact that some popular crops have been removed from the list of essential commodities is a practical necessity. ‘Essential commodities’ is an idea from olden days, a poorer time when Indians had to be protected from spikes in the price of foodgrains. Hence the hoarding of crops that were deemed essential was banned. Today, India does not have to be so paranoid. If a corporation is now allowed to buy huge quantities of crops directly from thousands of farmers, it also needs legal freedom to store what it has procured. ‘Hoarding’ is merely a mean word for ‘storing’.

If you are not smug, if you instead are one who feels vulnerable and hence hate the strong, like the government, any authority and the cultural winners of your time and place, and your own fragility has created compassion for others, then you will naturally be drawn to the farmers’ cause. Even though the laws are sound, you do have some excellent arguments against them:

While it is true that the government has not abolished MSPs, the fact that corporations can now buy huge quantities directly from farmers means that they could form a cartel to push down prices in the open market, increasingly making government procurement through mandis look fiscally extravagant. This is the beginning of the end for the idea of guaranteed MSPs, which has helped millions of Indians join the middle-class. Also, the new laws play down the right of farmers to go to court if they feel their contracts with private procurers have been violated. Instead, the laws are bent on persuading them to accept a less reassuring mechanism. Their liberty of appealing to the courts has been sacrificed for the speed of conflict resolution.

These are the two sets of arguments for two emotional sets of people.

But what is the truth, you may want to ask, as only one stand can be morally justifiable, surely? There is no such thing. There are always two moral stands—one for the smug, and the other for the nervous.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





The ruling party’s odd inability to promote a good idea


2021-02-07

One day in Chennai, some agitators sat on a footpath and claimed they will fast until they died. Their rivals then arrived, sat across the road, and started eating heaps of biryani claiming they will “eat until they died”.

The ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) has not displayed a fraction of the swag of the biryani-suicide-squad in its response to the politically orchestrated “farmer protests” against transformative agricultural reform. I thought great armies of farmers will emerge from various regions of India that are controlled by the party, rejoicing the end of middlemen and the abolition of statutory restrictions on where and to whom a farmer can sell his produce; I thought farmers would hold up brinjals and tell BBC correspondents about their luminous future once they are free to sell popular crops to anyone anywhere, even as the government guaranteed them a profitable price, exempted them from income tax, and plied them with free electricity and fresh water.

How difficult can it be for a ruling political party to convey to the world that in an electoral democracy it is in its self-interest to enrich half of India instead of impoverishing them while activists will pay no price for deploying ideology to ruin the lives of poor farmers, as they often do?

Instead the Indian government has got into a Twitter fight with singer Rihanna, the activist Greta Thunberg, and other self-diagnosed humanitarians of the West, and thus formally given the facile, dull and innocuous global activism of the well-fed the stature of being a threat to the nation. Also, the government or the BJP appears to have nudged some of the country’s richest actors and cricketers to endorse farm reforms.

The BJP has legitimate claims to interpret the agricultural reforms as humane, on par with Manmohan Singh’s liberalization of 1991 that served the Indian middle class so well. But I suspect the party does not realize that propaganda and truth have very different ways of transmission. When you want to tell the truth, never use famous liars.

Global activism, however farcical, usually has some substance, but the global attention on what has come to be known as “farmer protests” is so vacuous that the Indian government and the BJP could have used the movement to demonstrate to the world how the poor are sabotaged by the self-righteousness and moral posturing of a fashionable and ignorant global elite, a class of people who need to recruit causes to fill the emptiness in their lives with meaning.

It is not just the singer Rihanna and the world’s most famous activist, Thunberg. Most people in India and the rest of the world who stand “in solidarity with farmers” do not seem to have informed themselves about the issue. The agricultural profile of any nation is a very boring subject and studying it requires some effort. As a result, most people who have a view on “what’s happening in India” do not realize that the average Indian farmer is poor because the market for his goods is inefficient. The new laws hope to change that.

Why is one of the largest and most successful political organizations in the world, the BJP—or one of the largest governments in the world, for that matter—unable to tell its own side of the story, one that is not just a reasonable story but even humane?

In some respects, they are doomed by the very nature of storytelling. A story is more farce than anthropology because of its two requirements—plot movement and entertainment. The moral arc is the easiest way to move a story, and the triumph of the underdog is a combination of movement and entertainment. The triumph of morality and of the underdog are not truths of the world, but two powerful plot devices that the world has forgotten are plot devices. In the face of such devices, the strong and the successful are no match for the lamenters. The strong always tell bad stories.

But there are other ways in which a political party can communicate a practical idea for reform. In the US, Barack Obama’s Democrats did it well. The BJP is unable to do so because of its own failings. The track record of the party in carrying out transformative reform is poor. In 2016, it had the revolutionary idea of cancelling large-denomination currency notes, for example, but did not seem to know how to put new cash in automated teller machines. And it wanted farmers to become industrial workers, but did not succeed in expanding Indian industries.

Also, the party has the talent of preaching to the converted, but not to the rest. Any priest can preach to converts, but it takes a prophet to convert. An organization of priests will naturally make it hard for prophets to rise. Like many large political organizations, it has not nurtured people who are very good at conveying truths.

Also, this government has not been kind to people who are unrestrained truth-tellers. A defining quality of this era is the perception of vocal and creative Indians that they have lost their freedom of speech. They feel suffocated by this government. Why then would they back it even when the government deserves to be supported?

One of the reasons why strongmen have risen to power around the world is that intellectuals have become so despicable that even when they make sense, people doubt sense itself. This works the other way round, too. To a section of people in India and elsewhere, the BJP is such a cultural villain that they wish to believe the very opposite of what the party says is good for the nation.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Governments will eventually defeat cryptocurrencies


2021-02-14

If India were a parent, what kind would it be? I think it would like to accompany you on your honeymoon. So it was a bit surprising that India tolerated the Bohemian idea of cryptocurrencies for so long. But now the government plans to introduce a new piece of legislation that will outlaw Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. India also plans to introduce its own digital currency, thus making crypto uncool. In fact, it would not be a cryptocurrency if a government issues it.

It is not only India, governments across the world have started banning them. The cryptoprophets expected this, but they underestimated the power of the state. That the state is an actualization of an ethical idea might be a lie, but a successful myth. And old successful lies are hard to dislodge.

Since 2009, when Bitcoin was created, some of the brightest tech Bohemians have sold the world a lemon. That a new kind of global currency will end the monopoly of governments and central banks over money. This new currency will not exist in physical form, it will be created from nothing by a vast network of computers as they perform a vast number of computations to randomly create it. The currency will have no intrinsic value beyond the perception that it has value, and its own predetermined scarcity.

The lure of a cryptocurrency is that it can make transactions between two individuals secure and possible without inefficient intermediaries like banks and rule-makers like governments. It offers complete anonymity and freedom—two things that governments, including democratic ones, dislike. In fact, governments dislike even their own currency notes, as it provides anonymity and too much freedom.

So, why did some people think governments would allow cryptocurrencies to thrive, or even survive? Why would governments permit a system that could end its own relevance ?

But then, who would have thought in the golden days of monarchy that all of the affluent world and most of the poor world, too, will come under the spell of a laughable idea called democracy where ordinary people elect who wields power over them?

Cryptocurrency is only a type of extreme financial and emotional democracy. Even so, it is doomed in its present form. Its technology platforms, like blockchain, will become standard as governments themselves adopt them, but the cryptocurrency as we know it today will stand no chance against fiat.

Fiat currency is based on trust in the authority that issues it. Bitcoin, on the other hand, is built on a fascinating misanthropic question: Given that two humans cannot and should not be trusted, how can a network of computers confirm that a transaction is fair?

The way people are drawn to anonymity, you would think they do something very interesting and naughty every day, and the way they react to security, you would think some transaction vanishes from their digital ledgers every day. In reality, most people are mostly dull. Yet, there is no doubt the world is in the grip of a Bitcoin mania. And it is entirely a creation of extraordinary storytelling. It has a hero who is mysterious, brilliant, moral, austere and philosophical.

His name is certainly not Satoshi Nakamoto. In the aftermath of the financial crisis of 2008, a person who went by that name created, completed or revealed an elaborate computer programme that cryptographers say is an exquisite piece of work, and he also wrote a series of essays laying out the moral reason for a new kind of money—governments and central banks were corrupt and unfit to regulate money. And he raised a philosophical question: Do we need the inconvenience of trust to transact? What if computers make a dishonest transaction so mathematically improbable that it is impossible, and also grants anonymity? He has since vanished, leaving us a revolutionary monetary system that is today worth nearly $1 trillion.

Nakamoto showed that absolute anonymity was possible and not always shady. He even made it look sacrificial in a world desperate for fame.

Some people believe he is too good to be a single person; that he is probably a group of people. What if Nakamoto is the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)? Or something like that? After all, the National Security Agency of the US did ponder the idea of cryptocurrency in an academic paper years before Nakamoto published his essay on it.

If I were the CIA, I would create a Bohemian cryptocurrency for every anarchist to adopt, and quietly and sit and watch what they are up to. I am not suggesting Nakamoto is a government agent, but the fact that the creator of cryptocurrency is not known defeats the very freedom Bitcoin stands for. This is why the government always wins. It has a face, however ugly. And the face reassures a majority.

History is filled with wild things that were supposed to be free, but eventually got regulated by governments. The internet itself was supposed to diminish government control, as no single power can destroy it. Yet, every government has the power today to regulate it. Social media, too, was expected to transform the world, especially through photogenic rebels on Twitter and Facebook. But these platforms are now begging governments to let them be. Streaming channels were suppose to force conservative societies to accept the freedom of artistic expression, but, as evident in India, they have meekly agreed to censor themselves to massage the thin skin of a majority.

Cryptocurrencies, too, will fail. You may argue that they’ll survive in a less rebellious form. But then a crypto has a binary quality. Either it is entirely free of state control, or it’s just another fiat currency in digital form.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





The young should quit activism and go make money


2021-02-21

You may say this is the wrong time to say it. This month, the Indian government used disproportionate force against a 22-year-old climate-change activist by interpreting her call for protest as a war against the Republic, and put her in jail. Other young activists, too, face serious consequences for their rebellion against India’s farm reforms. But then, the wrong time to say something is also the best time to test the tenor of a difficult argument. And the argument is this: India’s young, who are of sound mind, and this is an important classification, should quit full-time activism, refuse to work in non-profit organizations, sack themselves as humanitarians, and develop a suspicion for the hyper-morality that emanates from the West. They should instead make money, or do well in the material world in other ways, or at least start a doomed business.

I do not say for a moment that the young should not be interested in the welfare of other people, or that they should quietly tolerate despots. In fact, the only moral basis on which all my columns in this space stand is: ‘We have only one job: if we are lucky, we must take care of the unlucky; everything else is merely an argument about the best way.’ It is just that I feel the best way that the young, especially those of privilege, can serve their nation better is by encashing their luck in the for-profit material world, rather than choosing the easy option of festive grandstanding and do-gooding, which is often harmful, at best useless or an inefficient way to make the world a better place.

There are good arguments against such a view. Material success is tough, a mere lottery, and often rigged. Why should the young be trapped in the unhappiness of ambition; why should they waste their lives in dull corporate slavery? And, no amount of taxes deposited with the government or invisible jobs you create by expanding the economy can match the excitement and meaning of direct intervention in a social cause. Even so, my argument against early activism rests on these thoughts.

There is a crisis that some activists whisper about but cannot state in public. Humanitarianism has become a magnet for the unstable who wish to see unhappiness in everything. It is not a place where the happy and the sane can thrive. This is a dangerous atmosphere for the suicidal or merely the gloomy, like young people often are, as there is a perpetual over-articulation of all that is bad in the world.

Last year, Barack Obama exhorted the youth to create change by asking them to “make good trouble”, borrowing the phrase from a legendary American civil rights activist. “Good trouble” is not as naive as Obama’s imagination of “moderate Taliban”. The young can make “good trouble”. What is “toxic”, to deploy a useful modern term, is full-time idealism. The “joy of giving” is a pleasure that radiates from an emotional feudal system in which some people feel a sense of importance over the miserable. And that joy of facile validation can be an unmatched intoxicant.

As in the case of any drug, it has its risks. And activists do get into trouble with the state for their dependence on it.

When this happens, what is the moral responsibility of people who exhort the young to become “good trouble”? In the US, the human rights establishment can go to great lengths in taking care of its own. But its travesty in India cannot. The young who hope to be “good trouble” can be ruined by the state, and their handlers, who use them to achieve political and ideological ends, cannot always save them. India is merely an electoral democracy; it is not really a democracy in a Western sense, nor headed that way.

Much of what is going on in India in the name of humanitarianism is a part of the global industry of Western idealism with its identical values. It is a new form of evangelism. That is why a Greta Thunberg or Rihanna, or conscientious comedians like Trevor Noah, appear not to think they have an obligation to read the dense prose of a nation’s agrarian economy, at least on Wikipedia, before commenting on what a nation ought to do about its own farmers. As this column has maintained, India’s agricultural reform is a bold humanitarian effort, but to Western social evangelism, an agitating farmer on a tractor has to be the victim. In that way, once again, the global posh, in the euphoria of do-gooding, are actually sabotaging India’s poor. This is exactly how exotic socialism impoverished India, offering us tragic proof that good intentions can kill millions, and that the liberation of greed can lift one-fourth of a gigantic nation out of poverty in a single generation.

The Indian government’s claim that foreign agents are trying to sabotage its farm reforms does sound silly, but there is substance in the paranoia. The young do not always realize who is funding their agitation and why. After all, America’s Central Intelligence Agency has been revealed to have not only funded uprisings around the world, but also sponsored Gloria Steinem’s feminism, and the globalization of Russian literature.

To be honest, if I were India’s prime minister and worried about China’s rise, I would summon my secret service chief and wonder how to promote humanitarian agitations among China’s well-fed youth, and how to smuggle into that country the drug of ‘joy of giving’. That would help China’s rich, who are in search of meaning, inadvertently sabotage the rapid rise of its poor. I know this sounds somewhat funny. But then again, that is always an omen of truth.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Getting offended may have just got harder for Indians


2021-02-28

A few years ago, a man wanted to make a film about a little girl lost in a forest and a tiger keen to eat her. He sent the script to the Animal Welfare Board, probably to get clearance to cast a tiger, even though he planned to shoot the animal in Thailand. He told me that a member of the board refused to clear the script because she was offended by the tiger’s portrayal “as a villain”.

India is a haven for anyone offended by anything. I mention the tiger episode because every other thing that hurts “the sentiments of Indians” might be familiar to you. Your freedom of expression has always been subordinate to someone’s right to be offended. Maybe this is the case everywhere. How different is a cultural cop from, say, a humanities PhD who keeps saying, “It’s problematic”? But, in recent times, being offended has become a national sport of India. The courts will admit “the grievance”, famous people will be summoned, politicians will comment on the matter, and the offended will hold public demonstrations and wave at cameras.

All Indian governments appear to believe that a story can be told without offending anyone.

So when the government utters the word “guidelines”, storytellers feel a sense of suffocation. It’s almost Pavlovian. But, the Guidelines for Intermediaries and Digital Media Ethics Code issued by the government on Thursday were surprisingly commonsensical, even somewhat wise. They are mostly good for streaming platforms like Netflix, filmmakers, storytellers, even comedians, and you too, if you like to watch “content”, and also for journalistic websites that really go by facts. The guidelines make life difficult for Twitter, Facebook and WhatsApp, and for the long tail of politics that masquerades as journalism.

The views of the government in the entertainment domain reveals a nation that has accepted the changing times. Instead of banning content through ambiguous claims of morality, it asks streaming platforms to enforce classification by age, a normal practice in nations that are freer than India. In fact, not only has the government refrained from infantilizing Indian adults, it also treats Indians aged between 16 and 18 with respect. They can watch nudity as long as the context is not sexual. For example, Mr Bean changing in the locker room, or an aesthetic dance performed by two anthropomorphic swans. Through age-gating, storytellers have been granted the freedom to tell any story on any subject they want and in any manner, so long as it is not pornographic, the definition of which is not subjective to any reasonable person.

But all this does not mean Indians now cannot claim to be offended. They can still enjoy their thin-skin and be offended by anything. But they may not so easily run to the police or courts to complain. The new guidelines call for the formal creation of a three-tier grievance system to absorb the anger of the offended. This looks like censorship at first glance, but it is not. Rather, it might just favour storytellers and streaming platforms by delaying or even circumventing the terror of criminal charges. The angry Indian can still go to court, but the creation of a grievance system puts moral pressure on him to first go through innocuous channels before enlisting the intimidation of the state.

In essence, the government of India accepts that Indian adults are mature enough to watch sex, violence and doping, and early Indian teens will not be corrupted by just the sight of the naked human body. This is significant. Sorry for sounding like Rihanna, but ‘why isn’t anyone talking about it’? In cultural significance, I would put it on par with the Vatican admitting in 1992 that Galileo was right—the world does go around the Sun.

Life changes more drastically for social media platforms and activists. The government asserts its right to know the origin of any bit of information posted on a platform, and the names, addresses and nationalities of those who transmit it.

The Bohemian freedom that social media has for long claimed for itself was always thin in substance. As this column has maintained, there is a distinction between liberty and freedom. Liberty is our most important oxymoron—it is permissible freedom, or a set of freedoms that people are given in exchange for protection by the state. It is a price we have paid to flee the forest. In the battle between freedom and liberty, liberty won a long time ago. And India is now saying to social media that the idea of a global village is all very sweet, but you are still subordinate to the writ of the Indian government.

This stand was inevitable after a sanctimonious mistake committed by Twitter. It started censoring and blocking a particular kind of elected politicians around the world; it started making moral judgements.

India too has made an error—by clubbing its wise guidelines for fiction and fun with its stricter rules for facts and social laments.

In its uncharacteristic broad-mindedness on entertainment, India has rightly viewed artistic freedom as fodder for a gigantic industry that can fetch it billions of rupees in taxes and other forms of revenue.

In the last two years, I have seen two of my own stories alone infuse over ₹60 crore into India’s economy, generating hundreds of jobs and surely significant sums of money in direct and indirect taxes. The biggest industry of the future is fated to be entertainment. No other drug that anyone has made will match it. And to harvest entertainment, a republic that has for long been against fun must know which way the wind blows.





A new argument enters the loud world of fitness debates


2021-03-09

When I hear the words, “what we are evolved for is…”, I know some nonsense is coming. Some phrases foreshadow scholarly blather. Like, “hunter-gatherer” and “Palaeolithic”. I think Western anthropology is like a great novel that wants to be bad science. It has a naive obsession with “what we are evolved for” (“to pick berries” is a favourite answer). All this when all of human history offers colossal evidence in plain sight that points to what we are actually “evolved for”. As billions of people of all races across aeons have shown, by simply living, what we are evolved for is whatever it is that we are doing right now, including those of us who are anthropologists with a mysterious fondness for gathering berries.

But now and then the field asserts its right as a proper science. That is the rebuke I felt when I read Burn: The Misunderstood Science of Metabolism, which released last week. In this illuminating work, the evolutionary anthropologist Herman Pontzer partly supports his theories through his painstaking study of the Hadza people in northern Tanzania. They are an ancient tribe of “hunter-gatherers” who do pick berries. But still.

Burn is a portrait of humans according to metabolism. And its central hypothesis is at first glance disturbing to the hardworking, embarrassing to those who have heard too many Silicon Valley podcasts on fitness, and fated to be misunderstood by the lazy. The hypothesis is this: There is a limit to how many calories you can burn in a day, no matter what you do. Even if you run a marathon every day for over a hundred days, and there are people who do that.

The more you exert yourself, the more your body conserves itself by turning off the other ways in which it spends energy—such as nursing a grouse, feeling mental stress, creating inflammations, fighting infection, nurturing sustainable libidos, preparing for reproduction, and taking care of your skin. Thus, there is a predestined cap on the number of calories your body will burn in a day.

This does not mean you should stop exercising. This means the most valuable thing about exercise is not weight loss; it does something more important. Moderate to hard exercise may push the body to suppress some of its trivial and harmful activities, like creating needless inflammations, wallowing in excessive psychological distress and holding up a placard with a moral message on the wayside.

But, as physical exertion grows more strenuous, for instance when a person rows across the Atlantic for a month, the body begins to switch off some of its essential functions. Inside the body, the cost of something lighting up is at the expense of something else being shut down. The brain of children, Pontzer says, takes up so much energy, “it actually slows down growth in the rest of the body”.

A resting person who weighs 70kg will burn 70 kilocalories in an hour. According to The Compendium of Physical Activity, a dynamic compilation of calorific costs, sitting burns 1.3 times more calories as resting; and standing “on two legs” burns 1.8 times, which is, oddly, the same as “sexual activity, general, moderate effort”. Maybe the Compendium should study more passionate people. Other forms of a high-intensity work-out, like “Navy Seal training”, burn 10 to 13 times more calories than resting. Even though the brain takes up a lot of energy, thinking itself is believed to burn very little. About 4 kilocalories combust when a chess player plays a tough opponent. But learning, Pontzer says, burns a lot more calories. What the body can burn through activity, however, is meagre compared to the energy that food can store. This is why your diet has become the key to modern fitness.

One of the surprising claims Pontzer makes is that all diets are equal. There is no particular advantage in the famed low-carb diets. He challenges the theories of low-carb evangelists like Gary Taubes, whose Why We Get Fat is a persuasive book that considers sugar the primary villain of our times and fat a victim of the sugar lobby. Taubes is of the view that just the thought of sugar (which, from the point of view of chemistry, includes rice and maida) makes the body secrete the hormone insulin. And when we eat sugar, the body releases more insulin. And insulin, according to Taubes, prevents the human body from burning fat.

But, according to Pontzer, calories from sugar are not particularly more evil than calories from fat. No matter what you eat, if you eat less than what you burn, you will lose weight; and if you eat more than what you burn, you will gain weight. That is all there is to it. And the extra weight you feel after a sugary day is merely water stored in glycogen, which is excess glucose.

But Pontzer does concede that sugar is dangerous, and that is because it is tasty. Fast-burning carbohydrates like sugar and maida have confused the modern human’s hypothalamus, which is the seat in the brain that gives you the feeling of satiety and asks you to please stop eating. The sheer variety of modern sugar-infused food has exhausted the capacity of our brain to tell us when to stop, with all its consequences.

So how, then, must we live? What we can glean from the metabolic biography of our species is the banal truth that what is banal is exactly what will make us endure. The ideal way to be is what you had always suspected—on most days, eat austere, and on almost all days, give yourself a work-out that is a bit more than moderate and a little less than Olympic-training level.

A new book on the science of metabolism debunks many things you may have heard on this subject.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Rich Indians these days are waiting to flee India again


2021-03-14

Now and then, everybody has to flee home. Flee from parents, children, the spouse and the city. And, if you are Indian, flee from India. Upper-class Indians used to look forward to their periodic escapes from the difficult nation. They were not all terribly rich, just upper middle-class and beyond. They used to quit India once or twice a year by means of a straightforward vacation, work assignment or compassionate visit to an ailing relative abroad. Some would participate in amateur sports competitions held overseas, like triathlons. Even do-gooders fled to attend conferences in beautiful places. But the pandemic has stranded them all, and made them endure India for too long without respite. Even Indians with long-stay Schengen and American visas could not leave because of travel restrictions. Or because it was simply unwise. After all, India has somehow emerged as one of the safest places in the world.

Now, as the end of our great pandemic nears, or seems to, Indians who must exit India periodically to survive life are getting ready, keying in places on Google and ogling at images, as they await that moment when some of the world’s richest nations become safe to visit. As of today, the countries that are interesting to Indians and welcoming them are Russia, Uzbekistan, Ukraine and Turkey. These are good options, but the proper West is more alluring.

Tourists tend to describe a destination through its geographical features and prospects for activities. Such a description will not fully capture the essence of what Indians love about leaving India. If it is just about snow and skiing, India has among the finest slopes in the world; if it is about hills, mountains, rivers, great lakes, beaches, forests, ancient tribal settlements or grand ruins, we have them all. But people do not travel for a geographic feature. People travel to flee.

What Indians enjoy about the West, consciously or subconsciously, is the whole spectacle of the West—all that order and urban beauty. Cars go in lanes, and my favourite part is how they don’t quit the lane even when they turn a corner, and even when no one is watching. Honestly, I can watch this for hours. I do not know if order is a form of intelligence or retardation, but it is captivating to see a whole civilization maintain it. People across thousands of miles, across a whole continent, driving in their lanes—that is the real spectacle.

Moreover, median lines are not the only markings on those roads; there are so many other things, in different colours signifying different things, and everyone who drives there seems to know what it all means. And there are walkways everywhere, and they look fancy too, as though pedestrians matter.

Out there in the West, it is hard to convince people that they are happy, especially in Europe, where they have for long claimed things are bleak. But all I see there is joy in plain sight, street joy. People spilling out of olden-day pubs, on to cobbled ways, and drinking, eating, talking, singing and laughing. Kissing, too. And the government doesn’t consider fun an enemy of the state. In the midst of laughing yourself, you don’t see beggars carrying underfed infants. There is no trauma as far as the eye can see. Nothing is ominous. Not even other people’s religions.

Their newspapers, which are very mild affairs and do not stab you in the morning with details of brutalities, speak of gloom. But when you step outdoor, you don’t see any of it. The roads instead are filled with happy people who look expensively dressed, even if it is not winter. And everything is easy to do, whether it is getting on to a bus or just walking around for miles. And you don’t have to get molested or endure great suffering just to watch cricket like it is meant to be, in an actual stadium. And, of course, the air is so clear that it smells of trees, and on some days, you may also feel the full force of the sun.

There are spots in Gurgaon where if you train your camera at a particular angle, it will look like the First World. The optimum angle is somewhat upwards—that is, just about six feet above ground level, the altitude at which you don’t see Indians in the frame. Something about how Indians go about—the clothes worn, the gait—conveys the very antithesis of an affluent economy.

In the West, the uniform of the cops, too, looks so good you immediately accept they must be important people. Actually, all uniforms look important. Even waiters look so important, Indians tend to behave themselves. I think it exhausts Indians to spend so much time respecting people who are poorer than them. That is probably why they go looking for some Indian restaurant—to find Indian waiters they can torment. I witnessed this phenomenon in Amsterdam. Indian tourists would be very courteous with the service staff in most eateries, and then they would be found at Saravana Bhavan, which employs only subcontinental staff, yelling at the waiters.

After their first few days or weeks enjoying the spectacle of the West, Indian upper-class travellers somehow grow melancholic. All these straight lines and rules, all this order and equality, it gets to them. And they are happy to return home—which looks orderly from the sky, at first, before all those things that looked like straight lines are slowly revealed to be crooked. And the air is filled with horns and dust. And the returning Indians then rush off to their expensive islands, where they pay a premium to keep real India out, an India that occasionally seeps in, though, as a food delivery guy.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





The tyranny of public ratings in our hyper-democracy


2021-03-21

I wonder what the average rating of all husbands in the world might be. Will it be the highest in Scandinavian nations? Will husbands who have a 4.5 star-rating become famous among women? Would men with low testosterone levels have higher ratings? Will five stars be called ‘an Obama’? Will the global average rating of wives be higher than the average rating of husbands?

This may never happen. My rating as a husband is of course known to me, sadly, but it will never be public knowledge. But the modern world is full of ratings. Toothpastes are rated; their delivery, too, is rated. This is the age of collective opinion, and its hyper-democracy. So, while the review of a spouse is still in the territory of the melancholy poem, many other evaluations are open to public view.

Most people today are at risk of being rated, and they live in the terror of ratings. Big and small hotels, restaurants, doctors, dentists, taxi drivers, even passengers, hosts, guests, tutors, gyms, pools, retailers. And, of course, in case it slipped your mind, films and books. Once, only a professional critic could rate stuff; now everyone rates everyone else. The presiding indignity of the world is people pleading with you—or pretending not to plead—for a high rating.

That is the new middleman. Between you and how you want to engage with this world exists a row of silly stars, a shape that looks nothing like what it is meant to represent, yet is filled with such arrogant swag.

We may not always realize it, and our public evaluation may not translate into stars, but all of us have ratings. Professionally, socially, romantically. And the last person to know your rating might be you.

The omens of our rated life are, naturally, easier to see in less abstract spaces where everything is measured—on Amazon or Tripadvisor, for instance. This is part of an ongoing democratization of opinion. Once you needed to have credentials of your own to transmit your evaluation; now you only need a motivation to rate.

Today, two kinds of ratings coexist. One is a relic from older times—professional critics pass their judgement on a product that may not always reflect popular opinion. This is plutocratic rating. Like the Metascore of the film database, IMDB, which is an average of what two dozen critics have thought of a film. It is usually at variance with the ratings of crowds, which is often a more accurate indicator of how much you may enjoy a film. I used to have a covert regard for the metascore and a low opinion of ratings done by the masses, but after discovering some gems that the crowds had rated highly and some dull dishonest films with social messages that the critics had celebrated, I have reformed myself. I must also seize this opportunity to correct an injustice done to two brilliant Sherlock Holmes films made by Guy Ritchie, which critics had rated poorly but the ovation of crowds goaded me to watch.

There is a way in which a professional critic talks about a film or a book, or even an electronic gadget, that has no connection or relevance to how you absorb or use those products. For instance, you do not watch a film or read a book to enjoy “the social dynamics of eviscerated patriarchs”. Writers, too, don’t write to “examine the society in a gendered world”. They are only trying to tell a story, and readers are only trying to enjoy one. You will never guess this by how critics talk. As a form of journalism or an intellectual activity, criticism can be very interesting. But as recommendation, it is not only comically bad, but can also dissuade people from buying the very product being praised.

As a novelist, I have been a recipient of both professional reviews and customer ratings. Some literary praise has done more to damage the sales of my books than poorly worded but far more interesting customer abuse.

But then democracy, which has a stellar reputation, is not always a great thing. In the best of times, it is a fair projection of the majority opinion. But that is when a large enough proportion of people have voted. Often, democracy in ratings only means that anyone who feels wronged is given an opportunity to rail against an establishment. This, in turn, pushes an otherwise honest entrepreneur to buy ratings through crooked ways.

The world has accepted public ratings as a form of free-market democracy, but it has not asked who exactly these raters really are. The question ‘what kind of person rates’ has a popular answer—everyone does. But then, most people have never rated. In my understanding as a writer, most readers have never rated books. Most people in the world love films and very few among them have rated one. I tried to rate a product on Amazon once, and that was only because I was angry. I was expecting a microscope (don’t ask), and got ‘opera glasses’ instead. But I gave up once I realized the effort a review would take. I used to rate Uber drivers, but only on their request. Wherever I go these days, people ask me to rate them. But it is too much work.

So, I wonder, who are these people who rate? Outside the world of book readers, who have a long culture of discussing what they have read, there exist habitual raters. They rate everything they experience—hotels, restaurants, toilet rolls. Their opinion is not sought very often and they feel a sense of importance when they rate and write reviews. That is the human strain that ratings don’t immediately reveal, but is exactly what has created the hyper-democracy of our times. It’s a form of megalomania. And every business lives in fear of it.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Why Gurgaon residents plan to move to Goa but never really do


2021-03-28

When Gurgaon’s finest return from Goa, they get stuck on National Highway 8 in a still dismal river of mostly white cars. At a toll gate, that is, in a spot which defies common sense; there is no toll for private vehicles anymore, but employees of a contractor create traffic jams as they try to nab commercial vehicles, which are mostly white, that have not paid their dues. All around, there is dust. In winter, there is low-hanging smog, as millions of farmers (of ‘the-hands-that-feed-you’ fame) in Punjab burn stubble because more humane ways of getting rid of it are expensive. It is especially in winter that the people of Gurgaon dream of leaving Gurgaon forever and settling down in Goa. There, the air is clean, and there is much natural beauty, and the place has a global vibe, by which Indians mean Caucasian people do Caucasian people things.

Gurgaon is variously considered the richest urban centre in India, the second richest or the third richest. But there is no doubt it is rich even by second-world standards, with a per capita income that is possibly four times the national average. That is, if migrant maids and drivers are not counted, just in case they ruin a perfectly good piece of data.

Gurgaon encapsulates the modern urban Indian middle class—posh, but not artsy; highbrow in furniture, middlebrow in cinema; well-informed about the world through podcasts, and not books. Such identical corporate Indians constitute a Gurgaon in every major Indian city; and many of them ‘dream’ of moving to Goa, a word that this column will use to refer to any beautiful and quiet place that has a reasonable internet connection and the buzz of restaurants.

Some ‘men of action’ have even purchased plots and houses in Goa, and in the other Goas in the Himalayas and Kerala. Yet, very few actually make the move.

The richer Indians, the dollar-millionaires, talk of quitting India altogether. They have quietly bought citizenships of Malta or Canada. But even they don’t make the shift. They live in their urban filth, dying slowly in the foul air and road accidents that need not have occurred. Even this class dreams of Goa. After all, it is close to their ageing parents, and warm, unlike Europe and Canada. But then they don’t even move to Goa.

The fact that affluent Indians long to move to a Goa, leaving their Gurgaon, but don’t quite manage to do that must say something about human nature and India.

It is not that there are no arguments against settling in Goa. There are, in fact, excellent reasons. Goa has very few corporate opportunities for highly-paid executives. But the truth is that even entrepreneurs who have broken free of the prison of office and can work from “anywhere in the world” continue to live in Gurgaon.

The other common reason why people don’t move to Goa is, “schools, where are the schools?” Goa has fewer quality schools than Gurgaon. After hospitals, Gurgaon is probably best known for schools. But then an unspoken effect of the pandemic is that the idea of school has been diminished somewhat. Not that the physical school has become unimportant to the Indian parent; it is just that its centrality has gone. In any case, Goa does have three major types of schools for affluent children—the conventional rigorous school, the confused Bohemian school, and the schools that are rigorous on some days and Bohemian on others.

There is another good argument against settling in Goa. You may feel it every time you arrive in Goa as a tourist and you see a giant ‘expressway’ being built. Like many road projects in India, the work has been going on for years, and from the little you can see of it, you know it is already all wrong. Also, in some areas of Goa, the viral ugliness of urban India is coming. Its politicians are very clear that they do not want Goa to be a mere idyllic place. They want ‘development’, that terrifying Indian word which in all Indian languages means cement chaos, expensive ugliness, smog and amoebic golf courses.

So, maybe in the subconscious Indian mind, there is a suspicion that no place in India will be left beautiful. That everything will eventually be ‘developed’ into a Gurgaon. Even so, that fate, if it ever befalls Goa, is still over a decade away.

So why don’t Indians who can easily afford to live in Goa not move?

I feel there is a distinction between what people say and what they do. That is exactly what this phenomenon demonstrates.

People are conditioned to extol some aspects of life: proximity to natural beauty, the experience of order and quiet, some hint or prospect of sexual mischief, more time away from office and more time with family, or simply more time doing nothing. But most affluent Indians live in urban dumps, leading dull low-quality lives. How people live is a more accurate reflection of what they really want, no matter what they say they want.

If we go by the way of the world, by what people do and not what they say, we see that people are more influenced by habit and familiarity than by beauty or peace. People are used to a place, and to a certain kind of life and community. They are accustomed to the energy of congestion, the joy of a crush of people, the reassurance of sounds, the friction of all that is Indian, and to what it adds up to—the absence of desolation. This beats all the poetic things they claim in their wishes. The world is evidence that everything that the world claims it wants is a lie.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





A strange peer pressure has gripped India’s corporate executives


2021-04-04

Gurugram is packed with successful corporate men and women in their 40s who dream of liberation through their own startups, and dependents who hope to quietly sabotage those radical notions. The town is also full of those who have liberated themselves. Once, on Monday mornings, they used to go to an office; now, they are in small cafes talking about their ideas.

Across Indian cities, a new peer pressure has come to exert itself on middle-aged managers. If they are not working on their own startups, they feel they are rotting away in the lap of a secure dull job. If they are running their own startups, most of them have even more convincing reasons to feel a sense of failure; just that it feels more like a foreboding than restlessness.

They have developed some physical symptoms that once afflicted young writers alone in the throes of their next big novel, or film. In the trance of their ideas, they pace their rooms, walk down streets in meditative awe, write concept notes, and fall under the motivational influence of their professions’ gurus. They, of course, do a few things differently from young hungry artists. They listen for hours to podcasts from the United States on how to create a successful business. And they must surely have heard, at least once, that famous convocation lecture of Steve Jobs in which he said, “Your time is limited, so don’t waste it living someone else’s life.”

Since childhood, at every stage of their lives, they were told how to live, and they followed. They were given a clear idea of a final frontier, an objective that, if achieved, would ‘settle’ them forever. But what they have discovered of life is that after a famous objective-type entrance exam, there is one more objective-type entrance exam; then another frontier, and then one more.

Life is an onion made up of final frontiers. And now the final frontier is their very own venture. All their lives, they were driven by the fear of their peers doing better than them. This fear made them conform to every tenet of society. They did everything their elders told them they should do, and they stayed away from what they were told to steer clear of. But that fear just never ends; no matter what, the chase goes on. I am reminded of a poem by the Tamil politician Kanimozhi:

‘Following my father’s advice,

I joined the school, combed my hair,

Avoided some friends, clothed myself well,

Cleaned my teeth, prayed, married

And am now waiting for my turn.’

After a lifetime of training to conform, be dependable, consider ‘disruption’ a bad word, never be rebels, and even punish rebels, they now have to strike out on their own on the strength of an idea. How cruel.

Those who are consumed by ideas, after the trance of the initial months, begin to fear that their ideas are not remarkable enough, or perhaps merely plagiarisms. There are many who do not have ideas. They only know they need a startup, like writers who only know they have to write the next big thing, though they don’t know what exactly they must write. Where do ideas come from, they wonder. What must they do to ‘get’ an idea. Is yet another way of delivering food to people an ‘idea’ ?

Among those afflicted with the fever of entrepreneurship are those who have become venture capitalists. They will invest in chosen fevers, and hope one becomes a hit. So many of the afflicted now approach them to casually deliver a concept, that they have developed a suspicion of anyone who says he has a great idea. Their faces remind me of publishers who try to flee a person who wants to pitch a book.

Until recently, the corporate class did not have a foreboding of failure. They were optimistic, arrogant and the least melancholic. But now, in the age of ideas, many of them have begun to feel the frustration of defeat. It could be the daily humiliation of having to answer to bosses, and among the liberated, it is the prolonged absence of a breakthrough. A persistent sense of failure was and is the majority condition of artists and intellectuals who have an outsized influence on the world; it’s probably why they portray the world in gloomy ways and veer towards organized compassion. But what are the consequences of capitalists, too, feeling like underdogs? They will turn more compassionate, I guess, towards failure and sorrow, and join artists in portraying the winners of our times as the arch-villains. Much modern righteousness in the world, after all, emerges from millionaires despising billionaires. As a result, the golden age of lament will enter its platinum era.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





What exactly do we want animals to be?


2021-04-11

Documentary’ is an expletive. To many of us, it has come to mean a dreary film, and of late, a piece of sanctimonious propaganda issued by the empathy industry. So there has to be a more reverential way of classifying My Octopus Teacher, a film that I kept hearing about even before it was shortlisted for an Oscar in the ‘Best Documentary Feature’ category. Maybe we should call all unearthing of facts about us ‘anthropology’. And that is what I want to call My Octopus Teacher—a beautiful work of anthropology. But then, as you will see, it is an unflattering description of the film, which thinks of itself largely as the biography of a feral common octopus. But in reality the film is about its biographers—us. It is always about us. Everything we see, especially in animals, is all about us. We are full of ourselves. That is the human condition.

In My Octopus Teacher, an unhappy man named Craig Foster, whose unhappiness we don’t fully understand, finds peace in a kelp forest on the edge of the Atlantic, in South Africa. One day, in the shallow marine wild, where he appears to fly among spectacular seaweeds and animals, he finds a common octopus. At first the “liquid animal” is wary. But, after Foster returns to its den everyday, they seem to become friends. He dives without a heavy oxygen tank, and he is never in a wet suit, which means he never appears like a shark to the mollusc. A professional filmmaker, and a competent diver who has the capacity to hold his breath for several minutes, Foster captured his experiences on camera for over a year.

As the lifespan of a common octopus is about a year, Foster observed it everyday for “80% of its life”.

In the course of their acquaintance, the octopus rides on him, and at times extends a tentacle to touch him, which lends a strong visual sense of the expression ‘reaching out’. She lets him see her the way humans have probably never seen an octopus. She appears to walk on two tentacles. She camouflages by heaping shells over herself. In an extraordinary scene, when a pyjama shark attacks her, she finds the safest spot—on the back of the shark. The audience erupts in ‘oohs’ as though they have witnessed a Roger Federer backhand from an impossible angle.

In Foster’s attempt to make the octopus more comprehensible to us, he uses the word “intelligent” often.

But was the Octopus everything that Foster saw in her? Are animals everything that we see in them?

We want animals to demonstrate that their lives are more than just about copulating and eating and caring for their young, even though many humans may not be able to claim as much. We love it when we find evidence of an animal showing emotion, or just playing, or reasoning.

There is a video of a stray cow in Mumbai, which joins a group of boys playing football, and starts kicking the ball around. It first chases the ball, and after capturing it appears reluctant to lose it. We want to believe that it was playing with the boys, and that there is more to its life than chewing cud. We know of robber gangs that use monkeys to steal from tourists in return for food; and we delight in the fact that the monkeys now know what kind of stolen goods fetch more food. In My Octopus Teacher, there is a moment when the octopus drives a school of fish to and fro, an act that Foster seems keen to believe is not hunting, but playing. Another time, Foster suggests that the Octopus has used him as a tool in her hunting.

We don’t know actually what was going on inside the octopus’s head, and arms, which have millions of neurons. So often when humans see human qualities in animal behaviour, it is more self-absorption than science. We admire, for instance, the monogamy of the albatross, which has turned out to be not as monogamous as earlier thought. Millions believe in the myth of the dolphin’s therapeutic powers, that swimming with them is beneficial for children with physical disabilities and even autism and attention deficiency. Every time there is a natural calamity, there is talk of how “cleverly” animals escape. In the 2004 tsunami, some people like to say, very few wild animals perished. But then, humans count their dead, unlike what we know of wild animals, and that may be why they seem to get away. Even Jane Goodall gave questionable anthropogenic attributes to chimpanzees. In fact, a part of Goodall’s fame surely rests of how much she made chimpanzees recognizable to us.

But then, maybe we have got even dogs wrong. What if, as a forgotten person once said, dogs lick you because they know there is a bone inside? Alright, alright, endearing pets aside, maybe we get animals wrong because we are a megalomaniac species that sees ourselves in everything. Even in machines, the very basis of the hysteria around computers becoming self-aware. We search for alien life by looking for planets with water and carbon, and which are as distant from their stars as we from our Sun. Actually, sometimes when I get to hear some conjecture of alien life, I feel we are searching for Americans in other solar systems. Clearly, modern humans feel lonely in the universe; they want other sort of humans, who are different in an exotic way but still not so quaint that they will be incomprehensible.

Maybe all animals see themselves in every other animal. Maybe the octopus got comfortable with Foster because she thought he was just some lame mollusc, who had four tentacles missing.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





The confusion we suffer over the question of mortality


2021-04-18

A part of this, the part about not letting the dying die, is a universal human condition. We are obsessed with saving lives. Especially the lives of the very old. And what we mean when we say ‘saving lives’ is not really saving lives, but prolonging a life until the inevitability of impending death. That all people wish to live another day is the only confident assumption most people make about others, as though there was a giant survey commissioned by a respectable research agency with the question, ‘Do you really want to live?’

It does appear that people do want to live. For instance, many do wear a mask these days; at times, they lift it gingerly, tuck in a samosa, or take a deep thoughtful drag of a cigarette, and then pull the mask down again.

Our pandemic has demonstrated that even if people do everything they can do to die, like attending weddings and festivals after a whole life of having lovingly nurtured diabetes, society has no doubt they wish to live. But there is something more significant that the pandemic has reminded us of. The optics of delaying death are the same as saving lives. The young and the old, the healthy and the unhealthy, the lovers of life and the suicidal, all endure the same process of medical care.

In reality, saving lives and delaying death are different things. Saving lives, say when a disease sweeps across the world, is the primary moral obligation of medicine. Delaying the inevitable among the affluent old in expensive private wards is how the industry makes money. Our medical response to illness has saved many lives, but it has also created a culture of delaying death even if the life that is prolonged is worse than death.

Science has helped us become the first generation of humans that simply does not let go of life. This has less to do with any special love of life, or perhaps even of the dying, than our common fear of death.

In most people, being comatose is the biggest fear. They would likely have conveyed to the spouse these famous dark words: “If I am ever a vegetable, pull the plug.” Yet they do not have the heart to pull the plug on their own parents. The size of the hospital bill, which reflects how long and how intensely a person’s death has been delayed, has become a sign of love in people’s conscience and for public display. As a result, people today are doomed to be flogged to their very limits by the very people they love.

In a 2010 essay published in The New Yorker magazine, Atul Gawande, a surgeon and author of Being Mortal, wrote, “For all but our most recent history, dying was typically a brief process…These days, swift catastrophic illness is the exception; for most people, death comes only after long medical struggle with an incurable condition.”

All my life, I have tried to find out how the elderly feel about the realization that they have just about another five or ten years to live. They are not fooled by optimism, I learnt, but they love to live, even if it is with their sight dimming, hearing fading, mind wavering and legs collapsing. A time comes when the predominant sign of life in a person is a tremendous pain in parts of the body that they never knew existed, and such a life would be unbearable without modern pain-killers. Yet they extract enough from life to wish to continue. So when the final days come, their children will extend a confused rationale and keep them strapped in a bed as a living corpse.

It is usually never the old but the young who keep talking about dying. We are, after all, a species that distinguishes itself from other animals in possessing the merciful ability to kill ourselves and be liberated from boredom, or gloom, which are usually the same thing. But even those who contemplate doing it keep themselves alive, and they do so in ways that are metaphorically similar to how the world keeps the terminally ill going on life support.

Even terrorists in a suicide squad get punished through life. About 12 years ago, after a Pakistani suicide attacker survived his attack, India undertook a long process to sentence him—to death. The country’s then home minister P. Chidambaram said it was “a message to Pakistan”, and the message was that if you are a suicide attacker, we will put you to death. India considers living so precious that it was the most valuable thing it could take even from a person who had resolved to die.

There are many things that are natural to human beings that are unnatural in the wider animal world. One that we rarely talk about is the way we delay death. Our attempt begins at birth. A high proportion of people are not innately strong enough to have survived life without vaccinations and medicines. For long, we have been a species that has stopped rewarding the fittest with the exclusive rights to procreation.

Today, a majority of adults are unhealthy. But they will live long—if not vertically, then at least horizontally.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





India’s problem is its romance with informality


2021-04-25

I believe that India would have exerted considerable control over the pandemic in less than two months. I risk this optimistic guess not because readers have a short memory, but because of a few respectable reasons. India handles calamities well (in the end). Once a phenomenon becomes a calamity, India knows how to be exceptional. This is partly because what the country lacks in the form of order, it compensates for in informal ways. Heroes rise; private money pours; men and women do more than they need to. Even politicians, bureaucrats and billionaires, operating outside the system, create ad hoc solutions that actually work.

It may be difficult to see all this at the moment, as India is in the grip of a humanitarian disaster. Hospitals are under severe strain. There is vaccine scarcity, and a more dire oxygen shortage. Hospitals are turning away the dying. First, it was the public that was pleading online for help, then it was doctors, now hospitals. Government helplines have collapsed. Almost all government statistics appear to be incorrect. And there appears to be a vast undercount of deaths.

India is this way because we have no talent for systems. Many of our problems arise from this. A nation that has long struggled to draw straight lines on roads to mark medians and borders, given its innate disrespect for straight lines, will naturally have many other problems. We are repelled by order, processes, protocols, rules, planning, and the straightness of a straight line. I think we escaped the full curse of the central planning era because the planning part was lousy. We are an informal nation, addicted to the happiness of informality, a commune of natural villagers who deeply resent the urbanity of the modern process. We are good at maintaining social norms, but in everything else, our instinct is to wing it. In this, there is something very ancient about us.

This is behind not only India’s poor response to the second wave, but also the fact that somewhere, as a hospital awaits oxygen, an oxygen tanker arrives but starts to leak, and somewhere else a fire breaks out in an intensive care unit, killing covid patients.

People who could have sprung up on their feet in days are instead dying, chiefly because India did not anticipate or prepare for the second wave of a disease that had given us advance notice. Instead of bracing for an approaching tsunami, some Indians began to quietly gloat over a specialness about themselves that saved them from the plight of Americans, Brazilians and Europeans.

Ideally, all this should not surprise us, but the one dignity we offer ourselves is the right to be surprised by our country. As though we have seen far better times.

We are good at following a system if the clear consequence of a systemic failure is death. As in civil aviation. We do manage very well to fly without falling. Also, once people reach a stage that puts them on hospital beds, in the face of such clear optics of misery, India usually moves in admirable ways.

This is why my covid prognosis in India is so optimistic. Also, there is the precedence of the United States. Indians forget, but what the US went through when covid peaked was worse than what is going on in India today. There, too, hospitals were collapsing, people died in hospital corridors, and there were mass funerals. Even after accounting for the fact that the section of the American media that is popular in India was anti-Donald Trump, and so its pandemic coverage was a sort of political whiplash, it is hard to dispute that the US was reeling from the disease in ways that were similar to what India is going through.

There is a big difference, though, between the American disenchantment with their government and Indian. We have a far greater sense of failure because we have a very low opinion of our country. The second wave of the pandemic is only a confirmation of this opinion. Our children, who always start off as patriots, have no real pride anymore in their nation. India’s handling of the second wave has only lowered an already low opinion held by many of us.

As a result, some of India’s reasonable explanations for why we are suffering today are not appreciated enough. A few days ago, our external affairs minister S. Jaishankar answered the question of why India is short of vaccine doses despite being a producer of these. Apart from India’s contractual export obligations, he said, we are dependent on other nations for some important vaccine ingredients, and so did not have a practical or moral reason to deny those countries vaccine supplies, especially when India’s deaths were very low. Now that covid is a major calamity, India can withhold the export of vaccines.

Even so, this is a time for us to whip ourselves. That is another thing we’re good at—whipping ourselves. This is good. We have gained more from shame in our present than pride in our rumoured heritage.

But then we forget. Our civilizational shame is fleeting. Once the pandemic subsides, we will forget the terrifying days when people were dying around us and Indian hospitals were begging for help from the media and courts. We derive our peace and hope from forgetting.





What truly keeps people happy in such unhappy times


2021-05-02

A new question is in the air. What must you do to find joy in these times? It is a question that presumes you are sad, that even insists you are sad. So it looks you in the eye even if you have not lost someone dear, and you are not enduring the torture of caring for someone, which today could include the task of dragging a bleak, industrial oxygen cylinder. Even if you have been spared for now, there is an assumption that you are slowly sinking in second-order melancholy. After all, there is death all around, and a sense of inevitability.

So, what are people doing to make themselves feel better? Nothing much.

Most people do nothing special to feel happy. They are just happy. When they are lucky, they are happy, and when they are unlucky they are sad, but all arcs of their lives bend towards joy. In happiness they are not amateurs; they don’t over-articulate joy. Their whole lives are built around being happy. So what they now do is stick to a semblance of a routine, and surrender to habits. They work, chat, watch a lot of television, watch T20, read, play badminton on the street assuming it will keep them fit, lament that the gyms are shut as though they used to go every day, and they eat a lot of fast carbs. As before. They did all this more or less the same way before the pandemic. A typical Indian does many things in a single day to be happy in different ways without even knowing the motive. And most people achieve happiness because the bar is so low.

There are others who are happy in a more complex way, which they consider a higher order of happiness, a self-assigned high place in a secret caste hierarchy of living. They don’t need to be entertained by a story, or a piece of news, or by sugar. In not expecting happiness in all three meals a day, or every hour, they imagine they have liberated themselves from animal biology. Thus, when happiness does occur, they feel it more than the others because it is so much rarer. They, too, were exactly like this before the pandemic, and they too have not gone in pursuit of happiness. They too are pros at happiness.

There is an old golden piece of advice in long-distance running. Don’t buy new shoes for the race day. It is the novice who runs a race in new shoes. Seasoned runners don’t do anything different on race day; they stick to everything that is old, including their water bottles and bandanas and watch straps, everything that is deeply familiar to their skin.

Most people who have gotten away from the pandemic so far without being directly struck by tragedy do not feel the obligatory sorrow that the question in the air presumes because they found joy in what is familiar to them, in their habits, and in staying true to who they are. They don’t even ask questions about how to be happy in a pandemic, or at least ask this in a serious way. They are just happy. So where has the question come from?

The question has emanated from people who talk the most about happiness. People who have for long been dejected, long before the pandemic. They have some interest in the answer, but they love questions more than answers. Most people who say, “Have you felt so dark before, so helpless before, so hopeless before,” know that the answer is yes, they have felt so sad before, in different circumstances. The articulation of ‘how to be happy’ is often an articulation of sorrow.

The question has also come from psychologists and psychiatrists.This is because they are ‘qualified’ to have answers to such questions, which they then transmit. That is how the question has come to linger in the air.

Not everyone finds joy in bleak times by just being themselves. Some people are donating money to noble causes for the first time. Even people who know that every taxpayer is a philanthropist cannot help donating, because it brings them joy.

Some have decided not to feel the pain of other people, and they read news of the unfolding misery as though it is some kind of realistic fiction happening in another dimension. This form of protection from sorrow is more common than people are ready to admit.

Some have found comfort in becoming the guardians of appropriate sorrow. They condemn jokes and festivities, and the overt public happiness of the Indian Premier League (IPL). I am confident that they privately do watch Netflix “in these bleak times”, but they find other people’s public display of joy disgusting. They are like that grim relative every family has, who expects everyone to be in mournful silence when he is ill. Oddly enough, many of the people who oppose IPL matches as insensitive are surely among those who condemn thugs who enforce homage to a departed politician or actor by closing half a city down. This sanctimony, too—this expectation that everyone should be like you, be as emotional as you—is a way of manufacturing comfort from ambient fear.

But a majority of people find happiness through regular means, like by seeking entertainment, such as the IPL tournament. However, they are wary of the guardians of appropriate sorrow. They fear being perceived as bad people. So they have become secretive even about watching cricket. And when they want to share something good that has happened to them, they break the news with the preface, “In these sad times, finally some good news”, without realizing that in ‘bleak times’ the last thing people want to know about is something good happening to other people.





We’re finally living in the present-and trying to escape


2021-05-09

All the wisdom the world imparts, in essence, is some guy asking you to be as weird as him. Except one piece of eternal advice. “Live in the present.” This is an exception because even the anomalous people who say it do not practise it. Before the covid pandemic, I did not know anyone who lived in the present, or at least lived in the present in a meaningful way, beyond a fleeting minute or so. Yet, ‘live in the present’ is one of the most venerated bits of advice we have heard since childhood. Savants of all races have insulted people who live either in the past or in the future—all of humanity, that is. The ideal way to be, we are told, is to live in the present.

Now, everyone is living in the present. The lockdowns, despite some respite, have made people live in a very long interminable moment. And they despise it.

The days are identical; the nights don’t hold the promise of anything new; the cast of characters at home and the hisses of appliances never change. We are in the daily rehearsal of a play whose premiere has been put off many times. The present, which always had the modesty of being a mere corridor to a door, is now an ever lengthening hallway.

Some writers have been finishing page after page, some artists have been finishing canvas after canvas, all thinkers have thought long and well, and children have been finishing their lessons, but the work of most of the world depends on actions in the real world and they feel stranded in time. People have been planning and planning, but how much planning can they do without events occurring, ending, collapsing, succeeding, or failing? Hope itself is primarily a sense of motion.

The future will come one day, no one disputes that. But what has confounded people is the stillness of the present, the disappearance of motion towards the future. Everything we used to do in the present, it is now clear, was done to move towards the future, to downgrade it to the present and move on, and so on until we die.

Bathing, shaving, waxing, other forms of grooming a man does not fully comprehend, and even wishing to be a better person suddenly have no meaning without a sense of movement. So what was it all about before the pandemic—us just escaping the tedium of the present?

Trapped in the present, we can now fully understand why we find stories powerful, why we convert even truth into stories, and also people and nations. Stories have motion. In fact, it is clumsy to even say that because the fundamental quality of a story is that it is something that moves. Every idea of a story that tries to defy this quality will fail. A train that is still is still a train, but a story that is still is not a story.

This is the most corrupt aspect of literature—its humility. Through the story, through motion, a story reaches out to you and wins the right to introduce you to minds and ideas.

A story in which nothing happens is widely venerated by various middlemen of storytelling, just as the middlemen of philosophy have venerated living in the present. A still story, and a life in the moment, are not without charm. But what is dishonest is the expectation that we should not find such stillness drab, too dull to engage us. Most of us instinctively fear boredom because it is a type of sorrow that does not require tragedy to thrive.

To set a character in motion, writers give him an objective, or at least an inescapable fate. Even justice in a story is only a trick to set a character in motion.

This might be the central flaw in every story. Our pandemic suggests as much. The idea that life moves because characters have an objective might be the inverse of reality.

We so need a sense of motion, we so need to move from the insufferable present that we merely invent objectives and reasons. Maybe we are not so material, after all; just an animal that cannot handle the stillness of the present, unlike other animals. Thus, yet again, it is clear that we are not as great as dogs probably think we are.

The stillness of the present should acquaint us better with how our ageing parents or grandparents feel. What it is to be old, why do they look so sad when there is no reason for sadness, why are they so bored, and why do the happiest among them work so hard when they do not have to. And why do the old men of politics never quietly retire, and instead harm whole nations with their persistence.

We wish to put our beloved old in a nice cage where they cannot cause much harm. And we also expect them to be satisfied in the company of other old people, and not seek out the young so often, who always have some place to go to or something to do. However, the old too feel the interminable boredom of the present, and they too wish to advance to the future, and even to them future is not always death.

We are dreamers, and we are told by the people who tell us such stuff that we should not “live” in our dreams. We are taught to condemn day-dreaming because a dream that does not lead to anything is a waste of the present. But then, now we know that future does not exist for us to actually achieve it, but merely to escape the oppression of the present. Not everyone needs to know what they want, where they have to be, and not everyone’s life can have purpose. But everyone needs to flee.





How vaccination lost its sacred stature


2021-05-16

Indians who can spell ‘anti-vaxxers’ used to laugh at anti-vaxxers. Maybe they still do, not realizing that they themselves are not staunch believers in vaccines anymore.

Until a few months ago, India’s beautiful people whose head of state is Barack Obama saw Americans who opposed vaccination as semi-literate simpletons in the intersection of God, guns and a flat earth. But now, the covid pandemic has demonstrated that scepticism of sacred scientific ideas is prevalent even in the upper reaches of India’s socio-economic pyramid.

For the first time, a whole generation of adults had to make a decision to vaccinate themselves, not only their children. And they have revealed that paranoia over vaccines is a mainstream phenomenon. Fearing death and other inconveniences, hundreds of millions still do get vaccinated, but the past few weeks have established how easy it is to shake their adoration of a cornerstone of medical inoculation—that what does not kill you will make you stronger.

Covid vaccines, like other major vaccines, are backed by the richest democracies, the biggest pharmaceutical corporations, and the most venerated scientists and health organizations. Yet, at the slightest tug, even Indians who are considered refined have revealed either a fear or mistrust of them. Just that they express this paranoia with more sophistication than American anti-vaxxers who cite conspiracy theories and religion.

So often, a conservative niche foreshadows a common human behaviour. What the respectable media implies is ‘nutty’ turns out to be routine, though expressed in different ways in different cultures. In any region of the world, something about people who are close to their roots points to how most people in the world think, while people who eat expensive leaves alien to their soil are parodies of what they wish to be.

Almost every person in the world, perhaps, is a beneficiary of vaccination. Yet, all nations have to resort to public campaigns to lure people to vaccination centres. In the US, the governor of Ohio announced that he will give away a $1 million prize every week for five weeks in a lottery open to any state resident who has got vaccinated. In Japan, public trust in the safety of vaccines is low, a factor that has influenced the fact that only 1% of the nation’s population have received both doses of a covid vaccine. Despite a shortage of vaccines, India has been nagging its people to get the jab. Even the Delhi high court observed, “You have been playing that one irritating message on the phone whenever one makes a call… when you don’t have enough vaccines.”

That most of the world has to be coaxed to do the sensible thing is not surprising. But why have the kind of people who used to have contempt for anti-vaxxers turned cold to covid jabs?

One reason is respectable. After all, these vaccines were developed at an unprecedented speed. The people who run the world fanned the fears of major side-effects. Some developed nations paused their vaccination roll-outs in reaction to initial concerns of adverse effects. For Indians, the government is never the most reassuring entity. After your first dose, India sends you an SMS: “You have been vaccinated with first dose of covid-19.” This sort of message can cure hiccups.

Also, there is the question of how effective covid vaccines are. Why tamper with the body’s immune system at all, some Indians ask, if the efficacy of vaccines is uncertain?

But there are other reasons why India’s upper classes may have developed anti-vaxxer sentiment, and these are not very different from what influence US anti-vaxxers.

Too much information, for example. There is excessive news today. Millions of words and hours of podcasts on every issue, every fear, every bit of research. The streams of information are so vast and confusing that people can be influenced by a scholarly form of paranoia that comforts their present state of mind. Some people may have been better informed, even happier, if their internet connections were not so good.

By the way, one influential force in the US anti-vaccination movement was The Lancet, a brand name that is often followed by ‘the prestigious medical journal’. About 20 years ago, it ran a paper by one Andrew Wakefield that linked the Measles-Mumps-Rubella (MMR) vaccination and autism. Like US anti-vaxxers, the sophisticated here too arm themselves with information that amplifies what they want to believe.

In many ways, the age of influence itself is over. For most of our history, a small group of people had an outsized impact on the world. This is not true anymore. The easy transmission of ideas has replaced influence with corroboration. How you are feeling at one moment or another can determine your facts. Modern influencers are in reality corroborators. They are allowed to look influential so that they are more effective corroborators. Even on important matters of health, every belief finds corroboration.

Also, the medical sciences have lost their sacred stature. There are too many contradictory statements emanating from the establishment, and at times Western medical opinion has been irrelevant to the rest of the world. Giant scientific organizations and the West itself have lost their halos.

You may argue that people who can spell ‘anti-vaxxers’ should be able to rise above the chaos and make rational decisions. But then it’s a mistake to attribute special wisdom to people who are good at spelling.





18 uncommon health tips and insights


2021-05-23

I do not believe people can be held responsible for their untimely deaths. I say this because it is the decent thing to say, and I have grown to accept that decent statements have some truths hidden inside them. But what is hard to argue against is the idea that if we are healthy we have a better chance of surviving bad luck and the transient pandemics of our times. So, here I have collected the best health wisdom I have read or heard, or observed first hand, or deciphered in ways that I cannot reveal to you, and also the health epiphanies that transformed me:

One: If you are making a list of health insights, try keeping diet for the last. People hate reading truths about food.

Two: Austerity is not an imitation of poverty. Austerity is usually expensive.

Three: Culture is a sugar-delivery device.

Four: So is your mother. Also, just because your mother has cooked a meal, it does not mean it won’t harm you.

Five: A market is a democracy voted in by a majority. A majority is usually wrong about health (and everything else). So the unhealthiest things are also the cheapest.

Six: Everything the Indian government subsidizes in your diet can potentially give you a heart attack.

Seven: If you rate yourself as unfit and a piece of health advice makes you happy, then it is probably bad advice.

Eight: We live in an age where people are mollycoddled in matters of health. This is odd. The world has severe standards for everything else—for marriage, love, beauty, career and wealth. But when it comes to health, it lowers the bar out of compassion. But health is hard work; we need to push a bit, or maybe a lot.

Nine: The expectation that every meal has to be tasty diminishes the very idea of joy. We should make the tasty meal a rare joy. Remember, the reason the world is in such awe of sex is how infrequent it is.

Ten: Quit grains and sugar.

Eleven: Moderation does not work. At the heart of the fact that most of the world is unfit is not excess, but moderation. Moderation is excess in austere camouflage. It is too ambiguous a measure. Also, even small quantities of sugar and maida can destroy some bodies. Any cigarette addict will tell you the idea that moderation leads to abstinence is mistaken. The correct order is the inverse. Abstinence should come first, and then a meaningful moderation, if at all it is required.

Twelve: Male doctors often do not take seriously the complaints of women about skeletomuscular pain. This may be why ‘Fibromyalgia’ and the general use of the term ‘allergies’ seem like secret codes among male doctors for delusions in their patients, or mild depression.

Thirteen: On the other hand, many people are hurt when they are told that they might be imagining their pains. An imagined pain does not make it non-existent. Accepting its true nature might even be the first step towards getting rid of it.

Fourteen: People tend to overrate what they are good at. The flexible tend to think yoga is the answer to everything. People who can run long distances think cardio is. And those who can develop muscles fast have their own theories, in which they are the main cast. This is a competency trap. As in most aspects of life, success does not emerge from a single talent, but a combination of at least two talents.

Fifteen: There is no such thing as discipline. There is only the tic. It is defamed, but the only way people can perform difficult routines for years is because of a tic, or an obsessive compulsive disorder, or a mild character flaw, like vanity. We must identify and secretly nourish and cherish all our mild disorders. Virtues are overrated in self-improvement. Flaws alone will take us far. Discipline is merely a reputable name given to a vast collection of private procedures.

Sixteen: A useless thing the world tells you is that you must ‘get good sleep’. That’s like saying, ‘you must live well’. How to achieve it is what the whole world wants to know. Sound sleep is a talent. This means most people do not possess it. They should just succumb to their circumstances. If you wake up in the middle of the night, don’t fight it. Just read, talk (to a person who is awake), while away the wakefulness, and then go back to sleep. I have read that this was how the pre-industrial age world was, and I am inclined to believe that.

Seventeen: Many people breathe through their mouths when they sleep. This causes the erosion of enamel, and also bad breath, which are minor consequences compared to another thing that it may cause—sleep apnea, an obstruction in mouth-breathing when soft tissues block the throat. This also causes loud snoring. The idea that snoring and sleep apnea occur only to the overweight is plain wrong. In fact, many healthy people may not even realize why they have poor sleep—they are aroused by their own sounds that they cannot recognize, or are sometimes strangled by their own throats.

One solution is to tape your mouth with a soft paper tape, and then go to sleep. You will then breath through your nose. This will take some getting used to, and you may look a little weird.

Eighteen: Sleep alone.





Why your life wasn’t like that of the friends in ‘Friends’


2021-05-30

I took its premise very seriously. I was certain this was how young people in New York lived. I even thought, because of the way its screen title was designed, ‘F.R.I.E.N.D.S’ was an informative abbreviation whose full form posh people might know.

As you may have guessed, I was reminded of the show because of its ‘Reunion’ on Thursday. Millions of fans across the world had waited for it for years. Like a song, Friends reminded people of a time in place; their time in place. Friends itself is about a time in place.

Seinfeld did not have a moment of grief. Friends, on the other hand, aspired to ‘move’ its audience now and then. The two were very different sort of comedies, written by very different sort of people. But if Seinfeld and Friends had a fragrance, we know they would smell the same. And that smell comes from the two things that are common to them, which greatly contributed to their global success. Their time and place; the coziness of young friends, and the coziness of being young friends who lived in the heart of New York.

The joy of friendship in the busy downtown of a great affluent city is the very theoretical representation of perfect youth. It is glorious, joyous and probably does not exist.

At least it didn’t in India; I even tried to find it in Mumbai, which is India’s version of New York. I lived alone in a chawl but I knew hip people who spoke of jazz and all, and who said things like, “Bombay is a cosmopolitan city.”

The first problem I encountered in my quest for Friends-like people was I didn’t know what was ‘downtown’ in Mumbai. People told me it was ‘South Mumbai’, but that was a place where many of the elderly lived, and the trendy young who lived there had to live with the elderly to afford living there.

Bandra, a suburb, was where the Friends-like youth lived. They were the cosmopolitans, unlike the labourers from Bihar, who were ‘migrants’. But Bandra’s Friends then were not truly independent. At the start of the ‘Reunion’, one of the creators of Friends said the show was about “that time in your life when friends are your family”. But the Indian upper-class youth were nothing without their families, which heavily subsidized their ‘independence’. In return, their families told them what to do at every step. As a result, and for other reasons, the ‘Friends’ of Bandra were neither free nor happy. They wanted to be elsewhere; they did not know where, but were headed there. They were always fleeing their circumstances.

You may say that I would not have found these ‘Friends’ even in Manhattan; that sort of joy is a work of sitcom fiction and not anthropology. I would believe you.

The central characters in Friends and Seinfeld, as I remember them, exist in a joyful present; they are not fleeing their life or street or downtown or their nation. They are an unchanging cabal, and their lovers, if they happen to be outside their close circles, are ephemeral and unimportant. In real life, it is the opposite. People give up friends, the downtown, a small contained home, simplicity and fun in exchange for the idea of family. A dull person once tried to educate me: “It is called adulting.” People find a label that Microsoft Word does not recognize and think they have identified some remarkable concept of life.

When Friends was a rage, my peers in Mumbai led a life where friends occupied most of their leisure time, but were still peripheral. Actually, many of them did not even like their friends. They just needed to be with people like them, who dressed like them, spoke like them. People who had very high standards for human relationships and conversations had very few friends. The unforgiving, too, had very few friends.

The coziness of true friends was in reality not a common condition of youth in a big city; rather, it was the privilege of a lucky few. But in the end, even they fled their friends, the downtown, that compact life, and their freedom. The lives of Friends and Seinfeld, which merely need a stroke of luck to attain, do not last long.

What do people want? It is never what they say they want; instead, it is what they do. People want to own the individuals who matter to them, and you cannot own friends. That is why the joyous life in a city’s downtown is merely a transit for most people. Influenced by the idea of ‘balance’, they forgo a life without meaning in search of purpose and balance, which is a bit of this, a bit of that. But in the end, they are probably lonely.

Loneliness is a vague term given to a group of very distinct forms of isolation. We need a different sort of companionship for different times, and we cannot have it all. But in all its forms, loneliness is never a scarcity of people; it is a scarcity of people you want to be with.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





The unrelenting nuisance of sociable people


2021-06-06

The sociable declared Indians special and immune from whatever it was that people in the West were going through. They attended weddings, parties and dinners, and surely laughed hard. If you ever investigate why a group of ten people laughed so much in a restaurant, what was the exact joke, who made them laugh and why, you will never find out. This is a world filled with laughter, but some of us struggle to find a half-decent new sitcom.

When the second surge occurred, India did what it did best. It planned for nothing, but looked baffled at the rational consequences of its inactions. And everyone blamed politicians, which is the most therapeutic thing that is available to Indians. Now the same people are at it again. They have to go out and meet people in crowded places; that is what they claim is life and joy, and even the economy.

I read on Twitter, “You spend your whole life gathering guests for your funeral.” Several people have said this without crediting whoever came up with it, who I suspect was a loner, one who did not collect too many guests. But, the calamitous second wave that sociable people triggered by being sociable resulted in funerals without guests.

Modern life is an endless nuisance caused by sociable people. The nuisance is not in the act of meeting other people, which may be an essential activity, but in the excess. People tend to overdo what helps them escape themselves. The same phenomenon occurs in socializing. There is excess, and there is addiction. And, what people mostly think is moderation is in reality excess. The gregarious not only spread diseases more efficiently, they also crowd restaurants and aeroplanes, and inflate the general price of fun for true moderates, the decent misanthropes. The gregarious also control success.

One way or another, success is not a reward for being extraordinary. Success is a reward for being a good friend, given by good friends. People, especially the talented, gain immensely from finding their own tribe. And relationships with people are not built on efficiency because there is no such thing as quality time. There is only time; you need to marinate in people; that’s how companionship works. But then, everything about meeting others is unhealthy, involving large amounts of sugar and disruptions of a sleep cycle. It need not be this way, but it is. As a result, even without a pandemic, the sociable end up becoming the first carriers of any new pathogen. Also, they create a social order based on likability, friendship, drinking and the capacity to waste time with other people.

Now that such a social order is in place, there are vast professional and emotional advantages in leading unhealthy lives and some disadvantages in leading a healthy lifestyle, like rising and sleeping early, going out only to meet those who matter, and picking online chess over an outing for ice-cream. Actually, forget physical health, even if you have high standards for conversations, you are at a disadvantage in this world.

So, what am I asking the world to do? Stop attending weddings, stop crowding restaurants, stop meeting people, get interesting and quit laughing hard ? I knew you would be melodramatic. I am talking about a form of excess here.

The sociable are people who indulge in an excess of human companionship and facile activities like drinking to achieve it, as opposed to, say, trekking, which is a more difficult way to enjoy human company. The gregarious, who are addicted to excess socializing, are neither a minority nor as numerous as they seem in restaurants. By nature, they are just more visible (and audible) than the rest.

One may argue that most of the world is sociable and those who are not so, and who write good-natured columns rebuking the sociable, are a fringe group. But this is not true. There are many who don’t want to indulge in the excess but are forced to play along by a powerful system of fun created by the gregarious.

Have you tried asking people to meet you over a walk instead of food and drink? Many find it weird, or too intimate. But this was not how the world was. You read any history of modern science in Britain, you will invariably encounter two young scientists meeting up and walking through the woods for hours discussing the nature of reality and so on.

But today, especially in India, there is no network effect to support healthy and beautiful ways of meeting people. This is how the sociable are a never-ending nuisance to the misanthropes. Also, they have defamed the misanthrope as a people-hater. Leaving psychiatric cases aside, in the practical world a common misanthrope is not someone who hates people, and this is because most people are not interesting enough for that. The misanthrope merely despises what a collection of humans create—like, for instance, the dull social world, and the cult of mediocre superhero films.

A misanthrope is not necessarily a hermit. Surely, he did not stay at home throughout the pandemic. This is someone who would take some calculated risks to fly to beautiful places. An aeroplane is not a risky medium when it is not a social vehicle. It is safe if you don’t open your mouth too often.

As sociable people now begin to step out, and make plans to meet other sociable people, I do hope they achieve one of the most useful things that sociable people ever achieve—herd immunity.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





The amateur Indian and the malaise of over-articulation


2021-06-13

Now we speak of abstract things as though they are common truths, as though they really exist, and we think they exist because they have names. And it is most obvious in the US. If you are an outsider to American culture in every important way, and if you have not surrendered your cultural roots yet to its colonizing power, you may have noticed, or at least felt, that Americans talk a lot. A lot.

The over-articulation of their politics itself emanates from this intrinsic American quality. Every abstract thing is mapped, labelled and transmitted because there is a market for it. The many types of ‘attention disorders’, ‘depression’ and ‘bipolar disorders’, types of sorrow and, in the face of it all, formulas for how to be happy. What must we eat, how must we run, how many litres of water to drink, how to get rich, why a mother should be called a ‘birthing parent’, and endless laments—‘oh-no-American-democracy-is-dead’. Then the dissection of things like left-wing, right-wing, socialism, communism and other absurd thought experiments of non-Americans that the sane have taken too seriously.

It is not a coincidence that the country is a paradise for podcasts. If there is something they don’t understand, they have to first talk about it, and when they run out of concrete things like diet, they find esoteric things like crypto and of course the mind. Any guy with ‘neuro’ in his job description will have millions listening to him about ‘meditation’ or even the meaning of soul. And so often, we in India have to face the consequences of Indian subscribers who then try to educate us on the meaning of life, the meaning of everything.

Americans love talking so much that when they run out of things to say about themselves, they talk about other people, and also aliens. The way they speak of other nations and cultures, you would think they have a deep interest in them. But if you are an artist of any sort among ‘other people’, or even a journalist, you will realize they usually have no interest in what you have to say. What they are interested in is what they have to say about you, for which they need to find Americans or quasi-Americans, such as immigrants who have spent too much time at US universities—exotic enough, but not so authentic that they are incomprehensible.

And everything America does, the elite elsewhere imitates. Thus modern urban India is filled with a pointless but self-important articulation of ordinary human abstractions. There is something amateurish about this.

Is there such a thing as an amateur human, a person who is amateurish at being human? Yes, in the modern world. I see domesticated dogs, especially pugs and Pomeranians, as amateurs of their species. A feral wolf is not for a moment. The poor, too, are never amateurs. They exist comfortably with their environment, their politics. The amateur Indian, on the other hand, is a suave, culturally homeless person who talks a lot about ordinary things that once did not have names because they were too ordinary to be analysed in any great depth.

A pro simply does; an amateur talks endlessly about doing. The amateur writer, for instance, talks a lot about whether he must write longhand or type, and about the tactile pleasure of keying on an old typewriter. After listening to him talk so much about writing, when you see his draft, you wonder where all the quest for meaning went. Over-articulation is the central quality of a person who does not belong where he is standing.

Every person you meet in this world, you can put him in your eighth standard classroom. Then you know who the person is like. You remember classmates who used to make detailed timetables to study for exams and even to turn in their assignments (which was then called homework)? Or for anything in life. If they have to do something, they will first make a fantastic timetable in multiple colours with lots of underlined bits. These were the amateurs. They were good at the articulation of a schedule, but did very little. The amateur is always preparing, preparing for life, fascinated by the beauty of preparation because everything else is tedious.

Another place in the mind from where over-articulation arises is megalomania. In this world, there is no tribute written for most people. Nothing complimentary is ever said about them for long months. There is not even any news of them, actually, if we see news in its correct form—as a remarkable occurrence. But they see a mention about them in some places—like in astrology and lipid profiles. They also find their own biographies in novels, psychological concepts, ideologies, ailments. It is all about them, finally. Thus they constitute a fervent market for over-articulation. The media then moves to serve this market. Are you sleepless, are you afraid in “these horrid times”, are you “languishing”?

And, of course, now and then could be an amused column on over-articulation.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





What toll will Covid take on the BJP?


2021-06-20

All this was unprecedented, and it made the BJP’s rivals hope that the pandemic may ruin it, just like the anti-corruption movement created conditions for the destruction of the Congress. But will it, really? If not this, what exactly can defeat the ruling party in the near future?

The BJP has stirred unflattering emotions in Indians before, and the party has not only survived them, but even thrived on them. Now, in the middle-class reaction to the BJP government’s handling of the pandemic, there is one quality that should worry the party—brand stickiness.

When Indians say, “All politicians are all the same,” it is not only a resigned rebuke, but often good political analysis. There are no true differentiators between political parties, especially when they are seen as groups of people and not as organizations claiming esoteric things.

Almost all parties can be accused of corruption, communalism, violence and harbouring criminals. Yet, they are separated by what accusations stick on and damage them, and what never do. Charges of corruption and inefficiency tend to stick to the Congress, even though all parties can be accused of those. Charges of “communalism” and authoritarian disrespect for freedom of expression tend to stick to the BJP, even though it is laughable to assume other Indian parties are not guilty of those. Charges of anti-business practices and pandering to the poor stick to communist parties, even though there is no single region in India where a small entrepreneur or major corporation would claim things are easy for them or efficient. And, of course, the charge of “anarchy” sticks to the Aam Aadmi Party, and the way some of the business elite make this accusation, you would think they are used to Scandinavian standards of governance.

Political parties are also differentiated by what never sticks to them, what causes no electoral damage regardless of the validity of the charges. Broadly, communalism does not stick to the Congress, even though its individuals have faced serious charges of violent communal politics. Corruption does not stick to the BJP or AAP. Also, accusations of impeding economic growth rarely seem to affect any party in Tamil Nadu or Kerala.

The success of the BJP, so far, is a consequence of the fact its poor reputation in some aspects of human virtues has only helped it politically, while the poor reputations of other political parties and the brand stickiness of those reputations have dragged them to electoral defeats. India might be a corrupt nation, in many ways, but no political party has ever won because it is corrupt. The BJP, however, can win an election on its reputation of favouring Hindus.

Under Prime Minister Narendra Modi, even when the BJP government had clearly erred, or its policies backfired on account of poor execution, it emerged mostly unscathed. It cancelled large-denomination currency notes overnight and ended up denying millions of Indians access to their own cash for many days. Yet, its popularity was high enough to survive that.

So, what has the pandemic changed?

The BJP’s handling of the crisis seems to have created a new category of negative branding, and today this branding is entirely associated with the ruling party. The branding is of a specific form of incompetence in dealing with a calamity. It suggests that in the face of a serious national emergency, the party will not be able to manage the situation efficiently. All Indian parties can be accused of this, no doubt, but it is likely to stick to the BJP in a way that could extract a particularly heavy price.

It is useful to remember that at the peak of the second wave, people were not enraged by any of the other parties that controlled whole states. In fact, some of them, as in Kerala, were admired for their handling of covid. This is partly because the Prime Minister had projected himself very clearly at the start of the pandemic as India’s man in charge, and, earlier this year, when it appeared that we had survived the crisis, he declared victory. Thus, when the second wave came, he could not escape it.

So this has potential to injure the BJP’s prospects in the immediate future, but will it?

I feel the party will survive the pandemic, just as it survived the chaos after ‘demonetization’, but for very different reasons. When it cancelled high-value currency, its popularity was very high. Also, when cashless chaos took hold of India, there was a strong perception among the poor that the upper classes had lost more because the rich, obviously, had more money.

The BJP’s popularity probably stands diminished today, but the party, government and its leadership will survive their handling of covid because such calamities do not happen frequently. Also, except for a few regional parties, there is no political force that can absorb the current disenchantment with the BJP. And that is a complete waste of a new brand stickiness.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Why Indians love paying lip service to philanthropy


2021-06-27

If you are an Indian who still follows mainstream news, you could not have missed a celebratory item a few days ago about Jamsetji Tata, founder of the Tata Group. According to a study, among the people who were alive in the 20th century, he gave away more wealth in charity than anyone else. His ‘total philanthropic value’, the report said, was over $102 billion in today’s money, and that put him ahead of the Carnegies, Rockefellers, Fords, the Gates and Warren Buffett. If you scratch a thin layer off, you will realize that Tata has been declared the world’s greatest giver chiefly because he started endowments now known collectively as Tata Trusts, which own almost two-thirds of Tata Sons, and it is this ownership that forms most of his philanthropic value. This is an odd measure of a person’s altruism, but Indians celebrated anyway because the truth always interferes with national pride.

Indians celebrate their philanthropists even though India is not a generous society. Be it tips to waiters or grants that build the future, it is hard to get money out of Indians. We are more likely to see a millionaire bargain with a malnourished tribal to get ten rupees off. Indians do give away some crumbs in alms if someone is watching, especially a divine being. Some Indians have taken a non-binding giving pledge, but the option of giving away almost their entire wealth to the public or an abstract idea, is laughable to most wealthy Indians.

The unspoken tenet of the typical Indian family is to provide an unfair advantage to its own because the state is useless or undependable. What our rich appear to consider their primary duty is to pass on accumulated wealth to their children. Even their religious donations are often aimed at inspiring supernatural powers to enrich them and their children further. Also, some wealthy Indians harbour the feeling that they have made it big not because of India, but despite India. The nation is an impediment and not an ally. It is no wonder that so many Indians feel emotionally closer to their caste and community than to the wider nation. So community-level organized philanthropy is not uncommon. For instance, the Parsis of Mumbai, wealthy Syrian Christians of Kerala and Marwadis have traditionally given away money, though usually only a fraction of their wealth.

The West’s wealthy, especially in the US, appear to think very differently.

Capitalism might be a natural instinct of humans, but philanthropy is an invention. How greed and altruism should coexist in the same person is explained in one of the most famous magazine articles ever, Wealth by Andrew Carnegie, which was published in the North American Review in 1889. The article was later known as ‘The gospel of wealth’.

This essay is widely considered to contain the first principles of modern philanthropy. Carnegie argues that it is natural for a wealthy person to leave a tidy sum for one’s dependents, and that the tidiness of the sum is subjective within reasonable limits. But, he says, it is unwise for a wealthy man to bequeath all his wealth to his children and make them wander about in an aimless life of decadence. Carnegie not only argues the rich should give away their wealth to various causes that interest them, he demands something else, and it is this, rather than the idea of charity, that forms the basis of modern philanthropy: that the rich should begin giving away wealth during their lifetime. Men who leave vast sums only upon their death “may fairly be thought men who would not have left it at all, had they been able to take it with them.”

Carnegie points out that a master and his apprentices once worked side by side and were social equals. With the invention of mass production, the master’s power grew many sizes larger. An entrepreneur must either expand business or perish. “There is no middle ground.” A consequence is inequality, but in return capitalism made everyone prosper. Now even the poor have a lifestyle that in some ways is better than those of past monarchs. “Much better this great irregularity than universal squalor.”

Then Carnegie comes to what actually bothers him. Every age comes up with an idea to reform capitalism, and he fears that if the rich don’t create a fair world for future capitalists at the expense of their own progeny, it will be full of communists. Even then, industrialization was in competition with the business of reformation that fed politicians, failed capitalists, scions in search of meaning, writers and other artists. Thus, philanthropy.

The power of philanthropy is that it has some genes of capitalism, like greed and megalomania, but appears to do on a large scale what self-diagnosed humanitarians seek to achieve.

This is what India’s wealthy seem not to appreciate. Philanthropy is capitalism’s war against revolution. It not only confuses society by looking like social work, but also creates future capitalists by transferring capital from mediocre inheritors to the talented who, given a chance, would thrive.

Carnegie’s true faith was capitalism, and he donated his wealth to make his faith endure well beyond his life. India’s wealthy, except for a few like Azim Premji, seem mostly happy paying their taxes and fulfilling their ‘corporate social responsibility’ by sponsoring some vague charity headed by a fringe family member. Without an Indian guide on wealth in a capitalist framework that answers the question, ‘what’s the objective of money?’, it is not surprising that many benefactors of Indian capitalism are ‘socialists’. That is as funny as the fact that many fans of capitalism in India are actually broke.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





This is a better way to ask the government to stay off cinema


2021-07-04

Some adults actually put heads together to draft this proposal, and it is not worth the sweet tea they may have had during their meetings. Their plan is to amend an existing law so that if anyone objects to a film that has been cleared for public viewing, its certification issued by the censor board would be put to a review, maybe even cancelled, making the film unworthy for public consumption overnight. If you want any justice in this country, you have to suffer long years in court, but if you are offended by a film, you get express service—you don’t have to go to court, just say you’re offended and the government will step in.

Why is the Indian government doing stuff like this? With so many real problems that need to be solved in this nation, even within the entertainment industry, why devote resources to what films contain? Why create suffocating rules? Why ruin the industry with all this uncertainty over the fate of every film? But this is exactly how you must not argue with this government.

It is apparent that the government wants to control everything. In response, the way our artists protest against an impending public policy, however, you would think they are talking to Nani Palkhivala. They are not up against a constitutional expert. While fine points of principle may have some effect in courts, they need a different set of arguments to persuade the government.

Imagine you are talking to a shrewd Indian merchant about why you deserve a fair deal—what will you say?

You will build a non-ethical argument in your favour. You will not use words like ‘institution’ or ‘principles’. But before that, you would want to understand, clearly, what your interlocutor wants.

Why is the government investing so much effort in controlling cinema and other forms of entertainment? Just a few months ago, it had expressed a wish to regulate streaming channels. Now this.

The government has justified its cinema proposal by saying that the Constitution “imposes reasonable restrictions upon the freedom of speech and expression in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India…public order, decency or morality…” This official reason may be just a secondary motivation, but it is sufficient to obtain public support. Indians in general do not rate artistic freedom very highly as they do not fully realize how they are beneficiaries of this liberty. They would prefer that uncomfortable things are not said about their religion and caste, for example, and so would like all religions and castes to be considered sacred. Also, an unknowably large number of Indians seem to assign a high value to sex by making everything about it, including its portrayals, very difficult for everyone.

The existence of a minor moral reason is very advantageous for the state’s larger hidden motive.

What are the potential consequences of this proposal becoming law? Filmmakers who are critical of the government could be harassed and its supporters favoured. Eventually, critical voices would be too risky for big investments, inspiring everyone to keep shut.

Over the past few years, most popular filmmakers and actors have either stayed away from politics or aligned themselves with the powers. But a few, like Anurag Kashyap and the actor Siddharth have been very critical of the government and the Bharatiya Janata Party. If the proposal becomes law, they may find it hard to attract work. Modern India has not eliminated free speech; it has eliminated the space for high rewards from free speech.

If the proposal goes through, the entire mainstream film industry would suffer collateral damage. A smart government that seeks control should realize that too much of it with no pressure valves could prove counterproductive. Filmmakers tweeting their dissent is among the most benign forms of it for any government. It satisfies an urge and a market for it without shaking the foundations of official control.

Successful people, like filmmakers and actors, have much to lose. So their dissent is indeed brave, but they rarely ever cross a line. There is a limit to how much they are willing to lose. By virtue of being successful in the material world, they are beneficiaries of a stable order, of systems, and they operate within its bounds. But they also do the government a favour with their fame. They unknowingly overshadow and eclipse more potent forms of dissent. Just as in the material world the lucky few on top block the progress of geniuses at the bottom, so too in activism, the top rung suppresses the rise of dangerous activists. If successful people are muzzled, expressions of dissent could move from people who have much to lose to those who have nothing to lose.

The proposal could also wreck the film industry’s economics. What will happen if it becomes law is this: Unsure of what is safe for release, every film will be self-censored; many things that make a film delightful may go, all risky topics will vanish. As things stand, most films fail. It is very difficult to get people to go to theatres. They stay home and wait for a film to ‘drop’ free. Everyone today is like that character in an R.K. Narayan story who wonders why people climb a mountain to see a waterfall when the benevolent river takes the trouble of tumbling down.

Any further strangulation could kill commercial cinema. India should not take its film industry for granted. Many nations do not have their own cinema, at least as a modern mainstream cultural force. Hollywood imperialism has killed them, just as Hindi cinema had once killed Pakistan’s film industry.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Let’s celebrate what the RSS chief said about new India


2021-07-11

In 1992, Pope John Paul II admitted that the Earth goes around the Sun. Thus, 350 years after the Church punished Galileo Galilei for saying the same thing, it stated that he had a point after all and that if only his evidence were not so shoddy, the Vatican of his times would not have so inconvenienced him. Whether John Paul II really believed the Earth goes around the Sun is not the most important thing about the event; it is that he chose to say it.

A few days ago, one of the most influential men in India said something just as obvious. Some people said they did not think he meant a word of it; they missed the most significant aspect of the event—that he said what he said.

Mohan Bhagwat, chief of the Rashtriya Swayamsewak Sangh (RSS), the ideological mentor of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), said, “Those who lynch go against Hindutva.” In a nation where mobs have lynched Muslims, usually on allegations of ferrying cows for slaughter, and a perception has grown across the world that the BJP condones crimes against Muslims, here was the church of Hindu nationalism deeming the act a crime.

His speech was largely ignored by the media. Instead, it should have been celebrated. One reason why it got little attention has something to with the corrupt nature of storytelling—good news, hope and happiness do not travel as far as bad things. Also, even considering the idea that the RSS is humane will rob many self-diagnosed humanitarians of material and purpose. But some reasons why his speech was not widely admired by gatekeepers of the Indian conscience have substance. He was speaking to a tactical outreach wing of the RSS, Muslim Rashtriya Manch. As Bhagwat himself said, everytime the RSS has said sensible things about Muslims, “we are not trusted”. And similar statements in the past did not appreciably reduce the abuse and threats faced by Muslims.

Even so, it is extraordinary that he said Indians who harm Muslims should not be considered Hindu. The head of a powerful Hindu nationalistic organization excommunicating, even if only metaphorically, murderous Hindus deserves praise from anyone who loves people, India and sanity. As in the case of the Pope, it does not matter what Bhagwat believes. I do think, though, that the Pope was certain the Earth goes around the Sun, and Bhagwat considers Muslim-killers abhorrent and useless to his Hindu cause. Like the Church, the RSS is stepping into modernity. But unlike the Church of 1992, which feared becoming obsolete if it did not start making sense, the RSS of 2021 is speaking common sense because it is more self-assured than ever. Some battle has been won, and it does not require the language of lament.

That anyone who kills a Muslim is a criminal is not the only obvious but extraordinary statement in Bhagwat’s speech. In anticipation of how the speech will be received, he said, “This is not an image makeover… We don’t have to morph to do anything in this country.” He said the RSS was not a political organization. “Yes, we do have some thoughts about how to run the nation, and we do exert pressure, and we do use our heft during the elections to push our ideas…” You could sense a ‘but’ coming. “There are some important things politics cannot achieve…Uniting people is beyond the capacity of politics.” He said this without sanctimony, in a matter-of-fact way. Some Hindus, he said, “who may actually be very good people will say I have become naive”. But, he said, he had complete faith in the co-existence of Hindus and Muslims.

To douse “the fear in Muslims that the Sangh wants to finish them off”, he argued that a majority of Hindus do not wish them harm. “A man can appear menacing and deliver a pugnacious speech to Hindus about violent Hindu nationalism, but Hindus will not accept it.” If this is true, it would seem many speeches of BJP politicians have been useless.

Bhagwat then meanders a bit to build an esoteric image of the typical Hindu as a very nice guy. But for this small detour into magic realism, his speech is the finest on the idea of India that I have heard in recent times. And, because of who he is, it was also the most convincing. Here I list some of the other points he made:

“It takes time for everyone (Hindus) to get wise.”

“Dialogue (between Hindus and Muslims) is the only solution.”

“People who wish to defile any religion have no place in Indian society.”

“Some people argue that those who conquered them once deserve to be lorded over now. No. This is the age of democracy. Hindu Rashtra is not a Hindu-only nation.”

That this speech was not celebrated by the usual lamenters of Hindu nationalism points to a form of narrow-minded intellectualism that results in miserly praise for anyone who is different from them. Many crusaders who appear to seek solutions are often in the business of preserving problems.

But then, we did not see ecstatic responses from temple-going Hindus either. They are not cultural orphans, and many of them hold the RSS in high regard. That also points to something.

The difference between the influential and ‘influencers’ is that the influential are public figures with real power, like Bhagwat. But both the influential and influencers today exist in a world where influence is over. They are mere corroborators. When they articulate a destructive thought that millions have thought, they are amplified. When they make sense that stirs no mojo, they are ignored.





Why contentment usually does not lead to happiness


2021-07-18

In the film World War Z, a family in New York is stranded in morning traffic when a mysterious disease breaks out, transforming the infected into zombies. The family, whose athletic patriarch is a former United Nations investigator, played by Brad Pitt, escape the roads that are now teeming with violent zombies, and run into a residential building where a migrant family give them refuge. I would have hid here for months until a vaccine is found, but the former UN investigator prepares to leave, and asks everyone to go with him. His experience of dangerous places has taught him “people who moved survived” and those who didn’t perished. “Movement is life.”

It may not be obvious at first glance, but the 19th century American industrialist Andrew Carnegie said almost the same thing. And what is counter-intuitive from the mouth of Brad Pitt seems intuitive told by Carnegie.

Carnegie, in a magazine article, defended the vast inequality between rich industrialists and the rest as a natural result of prosperity. An industrialist who does not have suicidal tendencies has no option but to keep growing. To be content is to perish. There is no “middle ground which such men can occupy, because the great manufacturing or commercial concern which does not earn at least interest upon its capital soon becomes bankrupt. It must either go forward or fall behind: to stand still is impossible.”

We are able to see why a corporation cannot be content; why it can only surge ahead or collapse. Yet, most people do not see how the same principle works in individuals too. In fact, we are taught that contentment is a big virtue, that it is a state of satisfaction attained with some success. After all our reasonable material needs are fulfilled, we are told, we must not hanker for more and more. Contentment is stillness, it is peace, it is equilibrium. It is a nicer word for falling behind.

If ambition is a capacity for unhappiness, contentment is the talent for happiness. Maybe because I am a South Indian, I have known many content types. I myself was one once, but then the zombies came for me.

I have known people who have escaped their circumstances through hard work and then grown content; the young from affluent families who decided not to work too hard or get trapped “in the rat race” and instead “do theatre”; people who got great lucky starts and breaks in their lives and encashed it for a peaceful life of not wanting more than a comfortable life. Most of them are bitter today. Contentment, it turns out, does not lead to happiness.

As with a company, if you are not moving forward, you are slipping backwards. There are non-esoteric reasons for this. Contentment is a middle ground. The very poor cannot possess it. It emerges from a material state that is not very low. As the content stay still, others around them prosper, reducing the value of the middle ground. This is what happened to a whole thin class of Mumbai’s refined rich. When I moved to the city in the mid-90s, they still ruled the place; they occupied prime real estate and influenced culture and dining. People on Malabar Hill spoke of jazz. But then new money overtook them and made being rich very expensive. Prosperity has inflationary properties. Thus the material middle ground of old money has been so devalued, it does not feel like middle ground anymore. A major voice in Mumbai’s activism today is just old content millionaires cursing new billionaires.

The defining quality of the content types is bitterness. Once, they were smug. They could be both content and successful at the same time. So they thought their happiness emerged from their contentment. In reality, it emerged from facile success. But then, as their peers progressed, their assets lost value, they lost prestige, they aged, they became obsolete and maintaining contentment itself became increasingly expensive.

Like many South Indians, I am naturally inclined to be content. I had very few opportunities to know this early in my life. But in my 30s, I went through a period when everything had fallen in place—I found some money, a home that I always wanted, appreciation, prospects, lots of prospects. I decayed in a state of mild happiness for five years. Then, I remember walking home one evening and I felt I was in the rot of a very good life. It was not bad at all; I am a fan of happiness. But it was also boring. Also, my encounters with content artists forewarned me that it is not a good way to be. That phoney aura about them of not wishing for more, and that bitterness in them at having been left behind, that was hell. So people like me who are afflicted with contentment but are wary of its effects, adopt the strategy of serial, episodic contentment. Use the unhappiness of ambition to achieve an end, wallow in contentment until it becomes the rot of a good life, and allow a new restlessness to set in, leap again towards another goal, and so on.

Even in fitness, the content are doomed. As the metabolic rate slows, what used to work doesn’t anymore and the body decays without the marvellous ambitions of the restless spirit.

There is something cruel about all this. That if you are still, you rot. If you do not have ambitions, you can be destroyed by a sudden phenomenon, like a pandemic. But then should the fear of destruction change our character? Isn’t there something beautiful in the fact that our finest artists, scientists and entrepreneurs adore smallness?

The problem is not in the scale of success or even the devaluation of the middle ground. Contentment is bliss, so long as the people who have it also have the humour to tolerate being overtaken by the restless.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Why nobody seems very outraged by the Pegasus story


2021-07-25

At the heart of this story is a leaked list of nearly 50,000 individuals across the world who, according to a consortium of activist and news organizations, are of interest to the various clients of Pegasus, including the Indian government. It is not clear how many of them have actually been snooped upon. Forensic analysis has been done on only about 67 phones. Seen this way, the story is more lame than it sounds at first. And there is this mystery over why some significant foes of the government, like Sonia Gandhi or Prashant Bhushan, do not feature in the list revealed so far of “potential targets”, while several journalists do. But this is not the reason why you may not have been outraged. The implication of the story is clear: India snoops on Indians who are problematic to the government. Yet, it has not stirred strong disgust and other emotions in you.

Democracy is based on the premise that a government has a vested interest in being ethical because you will punish it otherwise. Journalism is about the threat to a government that if it is unethical, you will get to know, and you will then punish the government. But then, if you have become indifferent to political morality, what is the whole point of democracy and all its angst?

The idea that a government is elected or voted out for moral reasons was always more a myth of storytelling than how society can be observed to work in practice.

Most people are good, but good in a banal way—they do not want bad things to happen to others, but they will be politically stirred only if a bad thing directly affects them.

In 2002, when I was covering the Gujarat riots for a magazine, I thought it was beyond debate even in India that if a political party has a role in violence, and if that can be proven, the party will pay a price. As part of my reportage, I interviewed Praveen Togadia, then among the most influential Hindu nationalists. He said that for every English word criticizing then Gujarat chief minister Narendra Modi in the English media, “We will win 10,000 votes.” I am still not sure if he said it in glee, or out of professional envy, but there was no doubt he meant it as a plain truth. He would be proved right, but at that time, it seemed like an extraordinary analysis. The idea that any political party could benefit from an accusation of criminal conduct seemed implausible. Today, it is naive to possess such a frame of mind. And it is not because India has become an immoral place.

Snooping has a certain journalistic significance because most journalists have been trained to accept that ‘Watergate’ is the greatest news story ever told, and it was about snooping. The story exploded at a time when the influence of big news media in America was at its peak. They could provoke the moral indignation of millions, and as a result bring an American president to his knees. In India, the news media could end the career of one of its most popular prime ministers by suggesting that he took kickbacks in an arms deal.

But regular people are far more forgiving, far less sanctimonious, and more self-absorbed than they themselves realize. This quality is able to assert itself more freely today, as the power of the old media has diminished and the fate of the new media is closely tied to how well it is able to corroborate the emotions of people, rather than preach to them.

People rate themselves as flawed, and they have a practical arrangement with the world. They have high standards for politicians they do not like, and a low bar for politicians they love or whom they find useful.

The politician they despise has to be honest, peaceful, efficient, articulate, intelligent, straight and monogamous. A politician they love could have a criminal past and be untrustworthy, but they will find ways to accommodate him or her.

Even in the days before social media, the idea that the revelation of immoral conduct will end a political career was probably an exaggeration created by political theorists, as Donald Trump would later demonstrate. Everything about him was the opposite of an ideal presidential candidate, yet he won and may have won a second term if it were not for his perceived handling of the pandemic.

People gave him a long rope for misconduct that did not affect them, and he was then punished for something that mattered dearly to them—putting their lives at risk. Modi, too, would possibly have paid a price for his handling of the pandemic if elections had fallen in, say, April or May this year. But the Pegasus fiasco will not bother him much.

Indians do no wish to be spied upon, but their government spying on public figures and others is somehow not as stirring as other things that involve no major morality issue—for instance, the rights of stray dogs.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Our Olympic team vests say ‘India’. It should be prefixed with ‘despite’


2021-08-01

A blatant lie is on the vests of some Olympians in Tokyo. It reads “India”. It should actually read “Despite India”. The very existence of Indian athletes of global calibre is not because of India, but in spite of India. That is why I plan to form an Olympic bloc called ‘Despite India’.

Russia, banned from the Olympics for its state-sponsored doping programmes, is allowed to compete as ROC, which stands for ‘Russian Olympic Committee’ (but the full form is not recognized because the word ‘Russia’ is banned at the Olympics for now). Citing this as a precedent, I hope to persuade the International Olympic Committee to allow me to raise a team called ‘DI’.

The Olympics often reverberate with the lies of nations. That is what anthems usually are. The typical anthem is a very bad poem written by a poet who was friends with the strongman of his times who had the power to pick a national song. No wonder anthems are generally low-brow cliches about the greatness and goodness of a group of people. The anthem of ‘Despite India’ will be different—it will be an honest song, rendered as an angry rap about a nation that is cruel to the poor, which has no facilities for children to play competitive games, whose stadiums are mostly torturous structures where the experience of watching sports is among the worst in the world, where most towns have no modern training of athletes, scientific advice or healthcare. A nation that offers nothing much to its athletes but is dominated by a lumbering elite and middle class hungry for sporting pride.

There is justice in the Olympics. The world works very hard and spends billions of dollars to humiliate the Indian middle-class once every four years. As the games proceed, people divide India’s population by the number of the medals it has won; they mention the size of tiny nations that have performed better; and they remember the fact that India has never hosted the Olympics.

A sporting talent is an immense burden for the person who has it. People who have any exceptional talent in any field are enslaved by it because they have to nurture it and attain their full potential, or they will forever be consumed by the bitterness of failure. That is why society is so important to the talented.

But then to be young in India and been talented in any sport other than cricket is among the great human misfortunes. The whole nation seems designed to treat every Indian as a poor person. Any comfort, even air-conditioning, is wrongly perceived by administrators as a luxury. If you have ever been on a school or college team, and participated in government-run competitions, you will know how gloomy the sports scene is.

Athletics and swimming meets, even in a city like Delhi, are impoverished, unhygienic and chaotic affairs. Even karate, which is relatively upscale, is run by a provincial bunch of middle-agers who seem to relish starting events many hours late.

The talented poor do not know that they deserve better; that it is very easy for their nation to organize meets that start on time, provide bottled water for every athlete, offer hotel accommodation instead of lodging contestants in unused railway compartments, offer shelters so that athletes don’t wait for their events in the hot sun, ensure that girls are not harassed and no one has to endure the petty politics of sports administrators who use sporting federations as spring-boards to low-rung politics.

Until recently, a typical humiliation that was in store for many female Indian athletes was the accusation that they were men. It would usually come as a shock to them because their testosterone levels were never tested at any point in their domestic careers as athletes. It was only once they started participating in major international competitions that they were tested. Today, such athletes are spared because of a global confusion over the definition of a woman, especially a female athlete, and a moratorium on gender tests in many sporting disciplines.

You may argue that things are better today for Indian athletes. True, but we should stop congratulating ourselves for minor feats. In any case, other nations, even middle-income nations, have progressed much faster than India.

Despite India’s poor assistance to athletes, they have to endure the expectations of the middle class that yearns for national pride. Every failure of Indian athletes evokes public anger. So we have one of the most unfit societies in the world, with a majority who cannot sprint 50 metres, filled with strong opinions about athletes who have reached the global stage despite the mediocrity of their politicians and administrators.

Indian nationalism is chiefly about the rich recruiting the poor to do the difficult job of making India proud. A few months ago, someone on social media identified a buffalo-racer named Srinivasa Gowda as India’s response to Usain Bolt. In buffalo racing, an athlete chases two reined buffaloes. Gowda was timed at covering the 142-metre stretch in 13.42 seconds. Some other people then did the math and declared he was a major sprinter. There was a frenzy. Politicians, too, celebrated him. He was invited to the national sprint trials. But Gowda was smart. He declined. He knew that the buffalos contributed to his pace. And he saved himself from becoming a transient spectacle created to entertain facile patriots.

However, many others who are more talented than Gowda in conventional sprints have to endure race trials, and some of them eventually get to wear that blue vest on which is printed a famous lie.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Indians awaiting the return to ‘normal’ are looking forward to what, really?


2021-08-08

When covid first began to spread, the most contagious pathogens were alarmist analyses of American commentators whose influence on modern Indian thought is disproportionate to their capacity to be correct. And the most influential idea then was that a post-pandemic world would be unrecognizable. This was convincing then, but was naive, as we now know. The same politicians, the same billionaires, the same addictions, anarchies, biases and fears run the world.

There was a long phase during the pandemic when Indians granted Prime Minister Narendra Modi exceptional influence over them. And India had an opportunity to perform a revolutionary coup on its way of life and transform itself forever. India could have redesigned roads and pavements, changed rails, created new minimum standards for hygiene and inter-city travel. India could have even quit perceiving and treating all Indians as though they are poor.

But we did little, if anything. All those months when Indians stayed at home did not see much done in terms of public works. Normal Indian life is going to be highly recognizable. India, which does not wish any Indian to die of corona, will let them die in other ways. When things get back to ‘normal life’, more Indians will die on the roads, and in factory fires, but without masks. There will be longer queues of people shuffling into government hospitals for a host of seasonal illnesses, and urban smog will return. Indians will spit in public spaces as before, and cough on others. The office, too, is far from dead. Bosses will demand that their subordinates be physically present to reassure themselves that they still have underlings who can show through long unnecessary hours and wasteful acts that they are doing what looks like work.

Also, India’s great political stamina for useless things will return in full force as cities open fully for agitations and disruptions of life. All for lofty esoteric concepts and never for foundational, basic necessities.

In the ‘normal life’ that will return, the national definition of ‘essential commodities’ will continue to be food, mostly the kind of food that is not only inessential but deadly, made inexpensive by heavy subsidies.

India is in a perpetual—hence normal—war against poverty. And India’s main assumption that shapes all policy is that the only thing that is essential is food. Thus India will continue to confuse a basic necessity with what is essential. It will not concede that what is essential to life, even for the poor, is fun and other joys.

That the poor must be preoccupied with eating, and when not eating with foraging, and when not foraging with grim things, is an overarching assumption not only of the government, but every organization in the world that aims to eliminate poverty, including the American tech industry.

The same people who responded to the pandemic—in governments, academia and activism—are those who will be at the helm of ‘normal life’, when India and other nations shift their focus to their other deadly epidemic—poverty. Their poor performance on covid is a reminder of why and how they fail to bring our other epidemic to an end.

For Indians, normal life is about throngs of people. Everywhere. People are the backdrop, extras in the more interesting stories about ourselves. We have been missing them. Even though they make long queues longer, talk in movie theatres and cut lanes, we feel lost without them. Indians are unaccustomed to empty roads. Vast hectares of pastures without even a sign of people is the very idea of sorrow for us. Insufficient public infrastructure results in a life that is never devoid of crowds, and that has its own happy energy.

Indians, even those given to balcony enthusiasm, who suffer from chronic sorrow will have to return to ‘normal life’ by seeking non-covid reasons for their melancholies. It is hard for them to explain their reasonless sorrow because the threshold for what constitutes misery is very high in this country. Hence sorrows need to have exalted reasons. But melancholy, dejection, depression and other phenomena on the spectrum of gloom need not have an identifiable emotional cause. So, unlike the melancholic in rich nations, where mental afflictions are not expected to have major causes, Indians have to invent grand sociological and medical reasons, even grave injustice, to explain their affluent sorrows.

Our balcony enthusiasts have always felt it somewhat indecent to lament their half-glooms in a nation where people have tragic stories and yet manage to live banal lives with banal joys. The pandemic, briefly, offered India’s rich a respectable trigger. They talked about how the uncertainty of everything and their house-arrests, even though their homes were large enough to have balconies, affected their mental health. Those were still not acceptable reasons by Indian standards, which require bereavement or impoverishment to justify anguish. But still, among all the reasons affluent Indians have cited for their reasonless sorrow, the pandemic gloom was the most respectable. After all, it had the potential for death and destruction.

As ‘normal life’ returns, the sad among the balcony lot will have to go back to their old lame reasons and feel the unreasonable shame of feeling low even though they have been more fortunate than most Indians. And to cure their emptiness, they will try to make the world a better place and thereby make it worse. I am not a big fan of normal life.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Making the most of our time left with ageing parents


2021-08-15

In the end, he lost his own memories. He would scan his books as though he had never read them before. “Sometimes, when closing a book, he would be surprised to find his photograph on the back cover, so he would reopen it and attempt to read it again,” writes his first son, Rodrigo Garcia, in A Farewell to Gabo and Mercedes, a son’s memoir of the ageing of his parents.

The book, which was released a few days ago, took me to situations many of us face or will soon face with aged parents as they stagger into the final phase of their active lives. I am not speaking of those parents who are on their death beds, rather of those who might be somewhat healthy, by the low standards of our country and despite the fast carbs they consume in the name of habit and tradition.

I speak to my mother almost every day. I want to make most of our time together; I don’t take her presence for granted. We don’t know what to say, though. So we say the same things to each other almost every day. Some days she tells me the plot lines of the stories she plans to write. She finds the actual writing, the mechanical part, very laborious, but she enjoys the thinking part. And the part where she gets to tell the stories to anyone who would listen.

I speak to my father, too, more often than I thought I would when I was a boy. We, too, have nothing much to say, but at least we have current affairs.

Once, when Garcia Marquez was eighty, his son asked what it was like to be so old. “The view from eighty is astonishing, really. And the end is near.”

“Are you afraid?”

“It makes me immensely sad.”

Marquez was a man who lived a large life, filled with friends and laughter and incidents. As a character in his novel, Love in the Time of Cholera says, “I discovered to my joy, that it is life, not death, that has no limits.”

But in the end, as it happens to other old people, like our parents, his life shrank to his immediate family, and he wanted to increase time with his children. But they had their own lives.

Even after he lost his mind and did not recognize his own son anymore, when Rodrigo Garcia would say goodbye, the old man would hold on to his boy, “No, man, why are you leaving? Stay. Don’t leave me.”

Old age is a caste. The old long to be with the young, but they are expected to be with others who are old. And all around them, their friends keep dying, people who once shared their best memories. With the death of every friend, they move that much closer to anonymity. As Garcia Marquez said of the trend among his peers, “A lot of people are dying that weren’t dying before.”

Every decade of our lives, some topics of conversation vanish and new ones appear. In my 20s, peers spoke a lot about their parents, especially bad parents, but in my 30s, all talk of parents vanished. Now parents surface again—for their poor health, chiefly. I sense people do not have severe opinions of their parents anymore. They are not giants anymore. They have, finally, been forgiven.

When they were raising us, we knew of a fact—parents do not really know their children as much as they think they do. But then, when we begin to probe our parents, as we finally sit down and ask questions about their lives and they finally answer truthfully, we realize that children do not know their parents either.

“I spent fifty years of my life not knowing that my father had no vision in the center of his left eye,” Rodrigo writes. But this is certainly among the innocuous things he did not know about his father, a man who said, probably several times, “Everyone has three lives: the public, the private and the secret.”

Rodrigo illuminates the phases children go though as they watch their parents age. The hospital visits become frequent, and in the miasma they realize that medical marvels are aimed not at prolonging life, but at prolonging death. The physical decay is just the start. Then the mind goes. Then children have to make brave decisions about saving their parents from hospitals. All through this, the old desperately want to live, and to live well.

As his father lay dying, Rodrigo observes, “It’s a dizzying sensation to know the destiny of a human being.” Eventually, the heart of Garcia Marquez stopped sooner than the doctors had predicted. One thing he hated about his own death, “was that it would be the only aspect of his life he would not be able to write about.”

Looking at his body, his wife for nearly six decades, said, “Poor little thing, isn’t he?”

She was one of the most famous literary muses and the subject of her husband’s standard but memorable book dedication, “For Mercedes, of course.”

In the years that followed, her body too would fall apart. But she would smoke even when she had to be on oxygen, sometimes asking her son to hold the mask as she took a few puffs. Then she, too, was gone.

“The death of the second parent is like looking through a telescope one night and no longer finding a planet that has always been there. It has vanished, with its religion, its customs, its own peculiar habits and rituals, big and small.”

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





How we’re beneficiaries of a suspension of human rights


2021-08-22

That is a message in a recent book, Spy Stories: Inside the Secret World of the R.A.W. and the I.S.I by Adrian Levy and Cathy Scott-Clark, who portray India’s Research & Analysis Wing as a cunning, ruthless, and an underrated organization that is not only good at stealing informing, but also in manufacturing tragedies to harm Pakistan. This comes through in another new release, The Lover Boy of Bahawalpur by Rahul Pandita. The books also demonstrate that the RAW is not shy anymore to portray itself as a brutal shadowy force with a persuasive moral excuse.

The idea that the intelligence agency of a democracy is run by humane patriots who make a valiant compromise with their own conscience to kill and maim, and fund merciless terrorists for the greater good, is one of the most successful myths our times.

Stories about these subterranean agencies would often feature melancholic patriarchs who appear pained by their own practical games that have destroyed many lives. But what I gather, and what I suspect, is that a secret agency is usually a magnet for people addicted to the thrill of intrigue, and also sociopaths and sadists, whose psychological framework helps them thrive here. But they perform an extraordinary collateral service—they do protect millions of lives from other mad men who, too, kill for moral reasons.

The fact is, all of us are beneficiaries of the suspension of human rights in many dark spaces in this world, where horrible things are done to mine information.

Days after 11 September 2001, Levy and Scott-Clark write, Pervez Musharraf, who was the president of Pakistan then, wrote down his thoughts in a classified document. We think classified documents must contain complex stuff we cannot think up, but most of them are simple, like this: ‘“The US will go to war over al Qaeda at some point, and the Taliban will become casualties for shielding them… Then, Pakistan will have to choose. And if Pakistan chooses Taliban, while this decision will be popular, it will also be disastrous. Let us consider: 1. Taliban are mostly beyond ISI influence. 2. …The task is capturing their attention and maintaining influence over the US. But also reaching out to India.”

This is interesting for several reasons. Pakistan’s president had a view at odds with popular journalistic opinion even today—that the ISI controls the Afghan Taliban. Also, Musharraf wanted to reach out to India. But the RAW, the authors point out throughout their book, had become adept in portraying Pakistan as a rogue aggressor eroding the patience of a mature India.

After 9/11, the US treated Pakistan with very little respect; its Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) wanted directly access to the ISI’s counter-terrorism wing, whose chief Azmat Hyat said, “I now had two bosses…The I.S.I. chief, General Ehsan ul-Haq, and the C.I.A.’s counterterrorism chief, Jose Rodriguez.”

In 2003, something strange occurred, even by ISI standards. The CIA instructed its counter-terrorism centre to raid a house in Rawalpindi but refused to give any further details. It was a house in an upscale area, fit for a general. As Pakistani officers broke down the door, they were blindly following an American instruction with no idea what lay at the end of their search. It was possible that an irate Pakistani general could be standing akimbo there. But what they found was a sleeping Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, who was widely known then as the “mastermind” of the 9/11 attacks. It took some effort to wake him up. “When they did, he scrutinized their faces, and immediately offered them cash for his freedom.”

Soon after his capture, he was taken to secret CIA prisons in Afghanistan and Poland. There he was brutalized in various ways. He was also subjected to waterboarding, a form of torture in which a person is immersed in water so long that he feels he is drowning; in some instances, the subject takes water into his lungs. In Poland, Mohammed was waterboarded 183 times. “Mohammed had been filled with so much water that there was a danger that the electrolytes in his blood had become dangerously diluted,” Dexter Filkins wrote in the New Yorker, “The officer requested that C.I.A. interrogators use salted water during the waterboarding sessions.”

Nusrat Naeem, an ISI officer who helped create the Hurriyat, an organization that has fought for the independence of Kashmir, told Levy and Scott-Clark, “Human rights are a construct used in times of peace to choke U.S. competitors.”

The confluence of several games of several intelligence agencies in Pakistan reduced it to anarchy where even its president was not safe. After one of many attempts on his life, he said, with sorrow, though it might sound hilarious to Indians, “Some leaders get to visit the scenes of tragedy and pass on condolences. Instead, it was me who continually received commiserations.”

Meanwhile, RAW carried out several operations to make Pakistan look dangerous and untrustworthy in the eyes of the world. The authors hint that there might be some substance to theories that Indian agents had a connection to the 13 December 2001 attack on Indian Parliament. All for the greater good of law-abiding Indians.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Why is the mind so difficult for science to understand?


2021-08-29

Since the age of 16, I have waited for science to say paranormal things. I want there to be magic. Magic that is not only physics, but magic that is magic.

There are phenomena that point to exotic states of reality, like the infinity of space, and gravity, which is a distortion in space. But these are among the same half a dozen things in popular theoretical physics that I have been hearing about over the past many years.

The years of hoping that the extraordinary exists has taught me two things about science journalism. If the headline of an article is a question, it means the writer does not know the answer. If the writer knew, the answer would have made the headline. The other thing I know about articles without having to read them is that anything about ‘mind’ or ‘consciousness’ is nonsense (unless the article is about this fact); and any scientific article on the subject would always conclude that we know nothing yet. The latest issue of the MIT Technology Review, entirely devoted to “the Mind”, did not change my mind. I knew that if there was anything new and dramatic I needed to know in neuroscience, this issue would contain it. I read the magazine with a mixture of familiar hope and anticipation of disappointment. Hope for confirmation of the exotic, and disappointment out of habit.

In the last few years, humans have understood a lot about the physical part of the brain, its electrical circuits, where and how memories are stored, and how psychedelic drugs work. We have even improved our understanding of a banal aspect of consciousness—being awake. For instance, scientists have discovered that many comatose patients might be more conscious than previously thought. But our understanding of the more philosophical aspects of consciousness, the idea of self-awareness, is the same as thousands of years ago. Vague conjectures are all we have. With no clear idea at all about the meaning of consciousness and where self-awareness comes from, the brain is merely yet another organ; more complex, but yet another organ.

When what is important to humans has no scientific explanation, then something that resembles science takes over. Today, a guy with ‘neuro’ in his past or present job description can spout anything about the mind and related ambiguities like meditation, and his words would be influential. Others who want to speak about the mind can interview neuro-somethings and write books on the subject, or tell us their findings through that new medium of American over-articulation—podcasts.

The consumers of spurious news about the mind are the world’s melancholic. A key quality of the melancholic is that they were always so, always searching for solutions, always finding them, always reverting to melancholic states after their inner peace turned out to be transient. The history of the melancholic is also the history of the wellness industry.

All along, science has valiantly tried to crack the mind. Governments have spent billions of dollars to understand consciousness.

Over the past decade, one set of scientists funded by the US attempted to map the entire human brain. “At the level of individual neurons,” as Emily Mullin writes in the “Mind Issue”. The idea was to cure a host of famous diseases and also answer that great question: “How does the brain bring about consciousness?” Former US President Barack Obama called it the “next great American project”. A few years before this attempt, neuroscientist Henry Markram tried to “make a computer simulation of a living human brain… a fully digital three-dimensional model at the resolution of the individual cell…” The EU gave him $1.3 billion to build that brain model. The US would spend “nearly $6 billion” on the mapping idea. But the two grand projects have contributed nothing certain to our understanding. “…Instead of answering the question of consciousness, developing these methods has, if anything, only opened up more questions about the brain and shown just how complex it is.”

American tech billionaires, too, are trying to understand the mind. This is probably because they are scared of dying. A misfortune of their wealth is that dying is more expensive for them than it is for others. Maybe they think death is an obsolete natural technology that updates species without any care for how special an individual is. And billionaires feel that if they can understand consciousness, they may be able to figure out how to sabotage their own decay. Some, like Elon Musk, plan to download their brains to a computer. But the news from their labs does not hint at any breakthroughs. Forget a new technology of the mind, we still do not even know what it is.

Our consistent failure in understanding consciousness is remarkable. Generally, we do not fare so poorly in science. I do not think it’s the abstract nature of the mind that is the problem. Maybe the issue is that the mind is not abstract. Maybe, like the physical nature of the brain, there is nothing special about consciousness either, beyond its complexity. It is just another illusion of a chemical machine, like sight and touch. Primordial microbes became the neurons of the brain, and they have no idea what they are doing or why they send signals that make a human ask, “What’s the point of it all?” Maybe all of philosophy is merely a question asked too early in the evolution of science.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





When a celebrity dies young, curious Indian behaviours emerge


2021-09-05

All this is universal. Indians demonstrate some additional emotions and behaviour, which may not be unique to Indians but are still attributes that define us. This was evident when news broke on Thursday that the 40-year-old actor Sidharth Shukla had died, possibly of a heart attack.

Here is an incomplete list of how Indians behave and the things they do when a celebrity dies young.

•Many Indian reactions are philosophical but meaningless statements in the family of familiar inanities. Like, “We come into the world with nothing, we leave with nothing.”

•If the late celebrity had a popular facade of physical fitness, like large biceps, or was really healthy in more rigorous ways, and had died of some disease, or its effect, like a heart attack, there would be a trace of glee among people who are ailing (most Indians above 45, that is). There would be a declaration that life is uncertain, and a rhetorical question that asks what is the point of all the dieting and exercise if one can just fall dead any moment. There would be the vilification of something called ‘lifestyle’, and of modern Western fitness regimes that are inferior to yoga, which alone can somehow prolong precarious life.

•The sudden death of the young inspires everyone, at least for a day, to talk about “living in the moment” and cherishing “the now”. It is as though our preparation for the future is always at the expense of the present. In any case, if humans could survive the tedium of the present, they would not have invented the future. Hope is a place we have created so that we can flee to it now and then.

•In a nation filled with ham philosophers, there is special veneration of destiny every time we are reminded of the suddenness of death. Yet, it is impossible to convince India that the worst sporting idea in the world is the most sacred tactic in Test cricket—batsmen stonewalling deliveries to survive instead of scoring runs. No matter how good you are at defence, if a ball has your name on it, you will go back to the pavilion. A nation that celebrates destiny should know this—that in cricket, free will gets you runs and destiny gets your wicket.

When Indians invoke destiny and the inevitability of death (as though anyone has denied it) and how we must live for now, it is usually a philosophical campaign to justify junk food. Our celebration of “life” and “the present” is a sugar-delivery device.

•India is probably the worst place for a famous death. We are not good at according dignity to death, any death, let alone the death of a celebrity. There are no lines we will not cross.

When an ordinary person dies, the family will leave the world around them in no doubt that she or he has passed on. A mob will beat their chests and sway and wail and faint. Maybe it is a good idea to be this way. Maybe this is honest, maybe it relieves the pain of the two or three people to whom the deceased truly mattered, and maybe there are aspects of ancient cultural behaviour that are better than recent tricks of dignity. But we extend this public lament to celebrities, too.

If the dead person is a legendary politician (South Indian film legends should be classified as politicians even if they don’t contest elections), thousands of us will sway and wail. Most celebrities will not attract this behaviour, but the catharsis will still be played out in public. The media, for instance, will assume it has the right to make all details of the death and mourning public, and they would be rewarded by audiences that are not offended by the indignity of it all.

But one part of this public drama is a tribute—other celebrities in whites turning up at the funeral or prayer meet. These days in India, if beautiful people in whites do not attend your funeral, you have not made it. It will not be very surprising, therefore, if an Indian starts a company that rents beautiful mourners in whites to send off the wealthy who lacked celebrity.

In the media’s coverage of a celebrity’s sudden death, there is always one piece of information conveyed that has the quality of a disclaimer: ‘No foul play suspected’. This sentence has many layers of meaning, none of which means ‘No foul play suspected’. Instead, it seems loaded with the suggestion that there could have been ‘foul play’, and possibly even the secret hope that there was.

When a young Indian male celebrity dies suddenly, his girl friend should consider it a matter of good fortune that he did not kill himself. For she could be destroyed by the media, as we saw in the aftermath of the suicide of Sushant Singh Rajput.

Even if the celebrity has not killed himself, the media can blame his girlfriend for his death—as the source of a fatal form of “stress”.

Of late, many have accepted that the lover is as important a figure as the spouse, but they still associate something shady with the word ‘girlfriend’. It is as if the ‘girlfriend’ of a famous man was a transient shadowy figure whom the celebrity had not promoted to ‘wife’ for unknown but excellent reasons.

After the death of Shukla, several news media outlets linked a young actress to him in demeaning ways, like “rumoured girlfriend”. One even called her his “alleged girlfriend”.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Bringing beauty to Indian roads: A personal mission


2021-09-12

I have had enough. I announce that I have become a revolutionary activist. I will overtly and covertly push the nation towards my goal. What I want is straight lines. That is all. A bit of urban order and beauty on the streets, that is all. I wish the end of our feral civic freedoms, of our zigzagness, that daft rural informality in everything, and that look of surprise on an Indian’s face when a mishap occurs as the most logical outcome of his actions. As an Indian, my standards for urban beauty are so low that all I want is to see traffic in straight orderly lines of vehicles. Even a traffic jam where cars wait one behind the other in straight lines and in silence will do.

I want other people to fight for this because I am very busy. But I don’t expect any career activist or even one of those good fellows with a ‘moral compass’ to fight for straight lines. The thing about Indians is that we are obsessed with grand useless things— like culture, identity, ideology and obscenity. But what life is almost entirely made up of are little things. Like going in a car some place, or walking to a local market. And India makes little things unpleasant.

For many years, I waited for a new kind of activist to rise—the useful kind, the activist for small things. The type of person who will create a campaign for small liberations, like silencing the boors who speak on the phone inside a theatre, or creating a community of Indians who would block the path of any vehicle that drives on the wrong side of the road. But our activists are all grand people. You take any contemporary ‘humanitarian’ and ask what exactly has this guy achieved, and you will realize they are just people who say the right things, important things, nice things, but have not transformed much on the ground.

So I have to do it myself.

Is there a particular per capita income that a nation achieves after which people start driving like they do in advanced countries? When they start driving in lanes, stopping behind white lines, letting pedestrians cross without trying to beat them to it in some unspoken game. When traffic signals don’t turn to blinking orange for reasons no one knows; when all signals work all the time. When the edges of roads are not ambiguous and can be seen as distinct from curb-side pavements. When all trains have automatic doors, and air-conditioning is not considered a special favour.

These things do not require a society to be very rich. In fact, as a middle-income nation, India already has the money to look good. Yet, it looks ugly, out of habit. At the street level, most nations look richer than they actually are; India in plain sight looks poorer than it actually is.

My cause is hard because the sort of beauty I am talking about, beauty in public spaces, has a formidable foe—India itself. The country’s general urban ugliness is not intended, but it is not without reason.

In wealthy nations, the ambient affluence makes it miserable to be poor, or to be even someone who is going through a rough patch. Their ancient buildings are grand, the new shine, and everything suggests people are doing well. It is disturbing for the poor and the other luckless. India, on the other hand, makes you feel everyone is doing poorly. In fact, India makes you feel you’re doing better than most people. Its vast urban ugliness is about that. After the British ruined us, we were poor for many decades, and ugly public spaces reassured most Indians that they are not alone, or that public spaces belonged to them. Order on the streets was a form of aesthetic beauty that made Indians feel like outsiders in their own nation.

But then, a nation is a habit. And Indians have grown used to some shine. Swanky airports and air-conditioned metro stations are not fiefdoms of the rich, as some has-been intellectuals have claimed. Rather, they are proper public spaces today. In that way, the time has come for a more complex form of beauty, and it can be enforced without alienating Indians.

There is a mistake that India makes when it tries to enforce good ideas. It does not recognize that it has to do its part first before asking people to do theirs. First design good roads, fill all the potholes, mark all the lines, ban the traffic department from having fun with blinking orange lights, ensure that all signals work at all times, and only then can people be expected to follow order. To be authoritarian, you first have to be useful. But how can I influence India to do all this?

Trying to do anything good in India without the support of politics is mere posturing. As I am incapable of winning an election even on my lane (especially my lane), I can only try to influence some politicians. I need to identify one district where a politician who is a secret fan of straight-lines and beauty has considerable sway, and which can become a national model for public aesthetics and order. It will not be hard for me to convince him or her that order and beauty are so rare in India that they would be instantly noticeable, compared to other forms of social good, which are abstract. Also, I will try to convince other authoritarian politicians that the best way to discourage agitations is to make order sacred. It is very expensive to break law and order on the road when there is law and order in the first place.

I will adopt other tactics, too, but I can’t tell you. I believe I will succeed because I do this for myself, for selfish reasons, the only kind of revolution that can succeed. I have already said too much.

(Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous)





The agonizing wait for the decline of America


2021-09-26

In the horror film Get Out, a secret fellowship of Caucasians lures talented African-Americans into their custody, often by saying all the right things to them. And then they transplant the brains of wealthy Whites into their victims, who start behaving like affluent Whites. While watching it, I thought this film could be about how American newspapers lure Indian opinion writers and transplant America inside them, after which they start writing like Americans.

Every Indian who watches Get Out may think it is about how the minds of their peers are rebooted to imitate Americans: The startup guy who did engineering as his parents insisted, married their pick of spouse, and produced ‘we-two-ours-two’ kids, and now suddenly want to “disrupt”, that venture capitalist who indulges in a mission Asians almost never used to have—saving the world. That economist who knows the castes of his friends and foes but now talks of “Clash of Civilizations” as though it is some new thought. That writer who has started saying, “I am so stoked.” And Indians who never read a single Indian newspaper but subscribe to The New York Times.

It is so easy for the US to co-opt the most refined, educated, talented and affluent sections (all of these are mutually exclusive) of the developing world, and make them comical imitators of some American ideal. But for many years now, we have been hearing that the US is in decline. The recent fiasco of its hasty withdrawal from Afghanistan has served as further evidence of its decay. And that it is not as influential politically, that not many nations are scared of it, that it has its own economic problems, that China has eroded its clout, and that, all things considered, America is not the great place it used to be. If US politics is ever united, it is in conveying the dirge that the country is sinking.

But that is not the sense you get when you are outside the US, and perhaps outside the paywalls of its self-flagellating liberal media. In all important ways, the US is an extraordinary nation. They talk a lot about what is wrong with them (because they talk a lot about everything), but they identify and solve their economic problems with exceptional speed. Their science is stronger than before; their financial industry thrives, their entertainment, which is honest because it is primarily for domestic consumption, still enthralls the world. A high proportion of the developing world’s young wish to live there. The chief aim of upper middle-class Indian schooling is to deposit children and a chunk of their parents’ wealth in America in the name of higher education. And what is called ‘global literature’ or ‘global cinema’ is what America’s artistic establishment considers cutely foreign but still familiar. If anything, America is growing more influential. Chiefly because of its flaws. All its bumbles and wounds and all that chest-beating make it more real and humbler than Rambo’s America.

The decline of America is more humanities lament than fact. But the decline itself, if it happens, may not be a bad thing for the rest of the world.

Before American, there was British dominance. I am not old enough to remember the isles’ political dominance, but as a literature student, I could not escape its cultural dominance. My first realization that books can be bad too was when I was formally introduced to British literature. Among the big injustices of colonialism has to be the veneration of mediocre aristocratic writers and “thinkers”.

By the 1990s, the American hold over contemporary culture was complete, but abstract things were still influenced by the British, like the moral supremacy of secularism, and the unhinged idea of socialism, and the intellectual inferiority of nationalism. Liberation from British cultural torture freed the thinking of a new generation of influential Indians. That indeed is what it took for many Indians to understand there was more than one right ideology, more than one right way for a nation to be, and that many virtuous ‘isms’ were merely thought experiments.

The decline of a global cultural force clears the minds of locals. And the decline of America may free Indians from overestimating American things at the cost of all that is Indian. But American colonialism does not derive most of its power from overrated antics. Rather, its power comes from truly exquisite creations. Like the way they make tech and films and TV series and music. Even journalism. This need not be a good thing, because they are inadvertent tools of co-option. Upscale Indians try to imitate all that is good and American, and it just does not work so well here.

Take one of America’s powerful exports: modern activism. The singular evangelical idea of what is moral and that you can torment an elected government that does not agree with you through anarchy is not dangerous for US activists because its human rights movement is legally empowered. In India, given our grey zones of law, it is not the same. Blind imitation of American activism, thus, could easily ruin the lives of idealistic youngsters. Think of what happened to fans of democracy in Hong Kong.

A decline of America will also reduce the migration of Indians to that nation. I am not concerned about the comically-conceited idea of “brain drain”. In fact, the movement of the privileged has given opportunities to those from more modest families here. But if no Indian ever wants to flee India, that will increase their stake in the country. When we know we cannot flee, we stop mouthing grand philosophies and ideologies about nationhood, and instead do banal things like cleaning the air and water and the roads.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





James Bond and what stories think of their audiences


2021-10-03

In the end, James Bond will not die. That is the understanding between you and the creators of Bond. What is the point then of all the expensive dangers in his way? Where is the thrill if you know the eventual outcome? The promise of a Bond film is not thrill, it is familiarity. Like the sacred bond between NASA and aliens. A decent alien should be carbon-based, depend on water, send radio signals and do other things familiar to Americans as life, but with an extra limb so that it is more quaint than immigrants. NASA’s alien, which is part science, part fiction, and Bond and hundreds of other such characters in storytelling are consecrated by familiarity. Some details change only to help storytellers retell the same story.

The familiarity here is not only about your expectations of the story, but also the story’s expectations from you. Stories know a lot about you. They know you talk a lot about change and new things, but you actually don’t want that. What you want is what you are familiar with, but with an extra limb. We are suckers for home, and home is everything that is familiar. Stories know this.

Not all mainstream stories are about familiarity. In the medieval-fantasy series Game of Thrones, you can never be sure which ‘central’ character will be killed. That series knows the true meaning of violence, whose force does not lie in gore, but in bereaving you. It raises the stakes for you, and a story can then achieve thrill in an inexpensive way. This, too, stories know.

Every story that is told is a sum of stories told before it. And an analysis of you and every person before you. Here are some things stories know about you, or think they know about you:

You want stories to be moral. If an animal knew us only through our stories, it might think we are a very moral species. Even criminals do not want criminals to win in stories. In the 90s, when the underworld was still powerful in Mumbai, some dons fancied themselves as writers and would discuss scripts with top filmmakers. I gathered that all those stories were moral—good always triumphed, and the gangsters had compelling reasons to do bad things, for which they always had a price to pay at the end.

The heroes and villains today are not as farcically good or bad as they were even a decade ago. There is a bit of darkness in heroes, and a righteous mind in villains. But this ‘greyness’ is merely that extra limb. Nothing much has changed. A reason for the endurance of this moral direction is that stories have not invented an alternative. Even web series that claim to defy conventional storytelling do not dare defy this requirement of stories—that they be better than how you lead your life. The arc of the web-universe might be long, across many seasons, but it always bends towards justice.

In the Marvel farce called Infinity War, many superheroes die and a population-control activist named Thanos triumphs by killing half the life in the universe. But you might have accepted this ending only because you knew one more instalment was coming, in which you knew Thanos would be defeated. I had predicted in this very space months before Endgame that the studio would lean on the nonsense of time-travel. Time-travel is today a lazy piece of writing and the most unremarkable strand of a genre of fantasy that is wrongly called science-fiction. But it knows that you find it fun.

The triumph of good in all our commercial stories does say something about your inherent need to be good, the default human condition that may have given us an edge over other species, but it is also a result of a practical matter—the moral story is yet another old invention that is so perfect that its evolution can only be incremental (like an umbrella, a physical book or the iPhone 12).

Stories also know that your life is probably so happy that you think ‘darkness’ is a billionaire dressed like a bat going about the poorly-lit sets of a Hollywood person called Christopher Nolan. And that if a story gets one thing right, like a city’s depiction, it can convince you that everything else, too, is authentic.

Above all, stories know you are a probable megalomaniac. Full of yourself, you search for your biography in all things. Even your privacy anxiety is only a tribute you pay yourself because no one else does. But stories are where you look first. And in the ones you like, you ‘identify’ with the characters.

Pulp fiction knows you better than art. Art does not try to reach out to you, so it has no need to second-guess you. Art does what it needs to; it is more pure than humble. So even though it wants your appreciation at times, it has the courage not to care about what you are. But pulp fiction is a democracy and you are the voter. It has to gather data on you. This is mostly useless, but the genre’s best proponents have an ingenious talent: They can guess what you want even if you yourself don’t.

A story knows it is an idea-delivery device. Any complex thought can be delivered to a wide audience if it’s hidden in an entertaining story. Look at what Matrix did—it conveyed the idea that the material world is an illusion; and that if most people were shown the truth, they would still wish to go back to the lie; that there are no rewards to finding the truth beyond knowing its bleak existence.

Indian stories, especially, know that you need to know what qualities a young woman must possess for a young man to adore her. It’s usually her looks, wit and a certain sweet delinquency. But you rarely ask what the woman found in the fellow.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Why it suits so many voices in the West to flay Facebook


2021-10-10

Is Facebook like a cigarette, or merely an art gallery of human lungs? Is it a drug that harms us, or just memoirs of addicts, and some cat pictures? Were we better off when not all of us were allowed to speak to all of us, when a handful of middlemen told us who we are, what we must do, who we must vote for, which film we should watch, and which is the best restaurant in town? Was the world protected by inefficient communication and is it now being destroyed by too much democracy? Are influencers really influential, or are they people we have employed to make us do what we actually want to?

These questions rise again as Facebook is rattled by yet another deposition by a former employee who has accused the corporation of harming our mental health. Frances Haugen is persuasive. A computer engineer, she had joined Facebook, she says, to reform it. After working there, she felt the company did not aspire to be ethical. To prove that, she took hundreds of pages of confidential material with her when she quit.

What she says about the company is not new: Facebook wants you to be enthralled by its content, and it knows that enthralling content is often melodramatic, trashy and hateful. The longer you stay hooked on Facebook, the more ads it can aim at you. Haugen also invokes “children”. She says Facebook’s own research says that Instagram makes adolescent girls feel worse about themselves.

Mark Zuckerberg, the co-founder of Facebook, has defended himself through an inefficient form of communication known as sound logic. Yet, he did not state the hostile fact that the world was already formed before he created Facebook, that he only made the mirror, not your face. What he did say was that his company does not gain from hate as much as people think. “We make money from ads, and advertisers consistently tell us they don’t want their ads next to harmful or angry content.”

This is true. A few years ago, I remember, when an editorial meeting was in progress, a media tycoon walked in, looked at us in an amused way and guessed, correctly, that we were planning something nasty about the nation. He told us advertisers hate that; no advertiser wants to advertise on a page filled with accidents, riots, murders, scams and a bad prognosis of the world. Long before Facebook, there was journalism and its chief purpose was to keep showing what was wrong with the world. It is a mystery why some people thought it would be a good idea to sell soaps and cars on such a joyless platform.

The prevailing contempt for Facebook is the triumph of a Western intellectual fellowship, which includes conventional media. In the confluence of their powerful reasons, one strand is the very objective of their good journalism–challenge the powerful. Facebook controls the time of billions of people. Even if we grant that the hyper-democracy of social media only amplifies human nature and insanity, the amplification itself need not be innocent. Also, the relentless sanctimony of the press puts considerable pressure on a giant corporation to do what is right.

The other reasons why Facebook gets so much media flak are more interesting. Their commercial future is bleak. Even the venerated New York Times (NYT), which has made some kind of a recovery, is not what it used to be. But their financial ruin is a very small part of the worst that has happened to them. Few people have a measure of how influential the Western media was. Their journalists could influence elections, their film critics could decide the fate of movies, their food critics could shape tastes, and their analysts told other countries what they must do (mainly, ‘Be more like us’). Heads of state courted them; actors called them; billionaires begged them for favours.

But social media has ended their age of influence, and replaced it with an age of corroboration, diminishing the relevance of journalism. Even though it is a misconception that online advertising has grown at the expense of conventional media ad revenues, that is the general perception among many journalists. And Facebook is the face of the revolution that beheaded the old nobility that once interpreted the world for the world.

The accusation that Facebook has “polarized” society emerges from this grouse. Polarization is merely a sign that one set of people no longer has a monopoly on ideas.

It is hard to believe that not long ago, Facebook was seen as an angelic force—when American political results were aligned with what the intellectual system wanted. When Barack Obama used Facebook to win the US presidential election, keepers of America’s conscience did not seem to fear data-mining, which was what Obama’s campaign did. Take this celebratory report of 9 November 2008 in the NYT, ‘How Obama tapped into social network’s power’. It said that Obama’s data mining was so good, when he became president, he would “…have not just a political base, but a database, millions of names of supporters who can be engaged almost instantly. And there’s every reason to believe that he will use the network not just to campaign, but to govern.”

But then when Donald Trump’s campaign used social media even more effectively, Facebook suddenly became evil.

So, the old interpreters of the world were robbed of their influence by a movement led by Facebook, but its defamation today points to the enduring influence of the class it slayed. This irony is enabled by the power of negativity. This is the fundamental force in all our stories, in the success of Facebook, and in every effort made by one human to say something remarkable to another.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Delusions are infectious, and collective delusions shape history


2021-10-17

They were two middle-aged men, two boys in their teens, two women in their twenties, one in her thirties, and three middle-aged women. The family matriarch, who was about 80, was probably too old to climb a stool. She was found in another room, strangled. Those who were found hanging, except one man, were blind-folded, their mouths gagged, ears covered and hands bound. They probably helped each other tie themselves, or they were sealed in this manner by the man whose own fasteners were odd. The deaths are the subject of Leena Yadav and Anubhav Chopra’s documentary on Netflix, House of Secrets. It is a calm and terrifying recounting of an event that most Indians had only heard of through the hysteria of television news.

The deaths of the prospering middle-class family have long been solved as a case of mass suicide. Yet, they can also be interpreted as an accident, or mass murder. The clues that helped solve the case were in eleven diaries the family maintained over eleven years. Written chiefly by one man, Lalit Bhatia, but aided by others in the house, these had instructions on how to live, conduct themselves and perform some rituals.

The diaries began in 2007, soon after the death of Lalit’s father. Lalit, it seems, started believing that he was possessed by his father’s ghost, who dictated his views on what the family had to do to attain prosperity and spiritual enlightenment. On the night the family died, they were in the midst of a prescribed ritual. They may not have expected to die. According to an entry in a diary, they thought they would somehow return from the ritual. By most signs, this was a family that wanted to live. Yet, one man persuaded them to meticulously plan their own death.

A little known quality of delusion is that it is infectious. A person who is severely deluded can transfer it to someone in close contact with him. Some psychologists and psychiatrists refer to it as ‘folie à deux’, French for the madness of two, or, in clinical terms, a shared psychosis. But an imperfect translation of the French expression offers greater philosophical accuracy: ‘the folly of two’.

Milder forms of the-folly-of-two are more common than we would like to accept. There is evidence all around us. A man starts to think everyone in his office is out to get him; and his wife soon starts seeing that. Someone suspects the water is contaminated, and the rest of the family begins to get the odour. This does not look like a mental disorder; probably just poor mental health. We associate insanity only with the extraordinary because we think sanity is a majority condition.

The folly-of-two assumes the more serious name of ‘shared psychosis’ when people die, or become dangerous. Like when, a few years ago, two sisters shut themselves in their house and starved for many days until they were found. One of the sisters had started hearing their dead mother warning them that the world was trying to poison them, and the other sister also began hearing those voices, corroborating the delusion.

People of sound mental health are poor liars. To fool others, you need to first fool yourself. That is why the most influential spiritual gurus are never charlatans; they believe every word they say. That is how they infect. Shared psychosis is not only the transfer of an idea between two people; it is usually a transmission to many. And it appears that most people in the world are susceptible to secondary reception of a delusion. This is because a delusion can be very interesting.

The Bhatias of Burari, according to their neighbours, were an unremarkable family of seemingly sane and loveable people. Yet, Lalit had apparently convinced his family of not just one extraordinary phenomenon, but several. He made them believe in the ghost of his father, and that he was the deceased’s chosen medium, and that they must behave in particular ways, and that if they performed special rituals, something paranormal would occur.

When people recount the Burari deaths, they marvel at their own disbelief. The family had the trappings of modernity. There is a popular assumption that people who went to college or wear jeans are ‘rational’. But people do get swayed by a spectacular idea.

Lalit was in the spell of a powerful delusion. Despite that, or because of it, he had domestic gravitas. Though he wasn’t the eldest brother, he took over the family’s reins through the force of personality, eventually persuading them to climb a stool with nooses around their necks for a supernatural moment. In another age, Lalit could have started a religion.

The history of the world is the history of influence, and hence the history of delusion. Typically, a man sees a vision and begins to tell a captivating story. People misunderstand him, depending on their own mental states, and they think they see what he sees. And the ancient vision spreads, survives for centuries and lives among us.

People scoff at Lalit, but spirituality itself may have emerged from circumstances not too dissimilar. The sane trying to imitate the inimitable; all our tumults emerge from that. The spirits, the spiritual, the climate-paranoids, the enlightened—what if all of them were only Lalits, in a way, but Lalits who could persuade more than nine or ten?

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





The odd monopolies ruling our mental health discourse


2021-10-24

In matters of physical health, the influential are physically fit. In matters of mental health, the influential are usually, by their own analysis, in poor mental health.

There are big differences between physical and mental health, so there is a limit to finding parallels between body and mind. Even so, the over-articulation of physical health should warn people about the over-articulation of mental health.

In all the creeds that promote physical health, the evangelists almost always have fit bodies that most people do not possess and may not ever be able to. Many aspects of yoga and calisthenics, for instance, are unattainable without a particular arrangement of muscles and bones. The entire inspiration industry is built on the megalomaniac’s rhetorical question: ‘Why can’t you be like me?’ The ‘talk’ about mental health contains the voices of genuine sufferers but it is monopolized by megalomaniacs who have discovered a new way of talking about themselves—what they are going through, their reasonless sorrows, their problems, their fights.

Some good has come from this, just like calisthenic videos have made people fitter in their failed pursuits of hand-stands. I know some people suffering from mental illness who have started talking about what they are going through and have derived this confidence from famous people. It comforts them to talk; they are not expecting a cure. Even so, the public articulation of mental-health has been taken over by celebrities whose afflictions appear mild, and this has its dangers. The famous cannot speak the whole truth.

In Asylum, a history of how India dealt with its mental health, author Daman Singh writes that G.F.W. Ewens, once superintendent of an asylum in Lahore, believed “in a case of acute mania… regular and ample feeding was essential—if necessary, by force. For a patient who did not take eggs and meat, he suggested plenty of milk, ghee, sago, tapioca, and rice. If also induced to perform some form of manual labour, certain patients became less violent and began to sleep better.”

This might seem like a crude solution today, but it broadly represents the conventional view that nutrition and exercise have a major effect on mental health. And that is also the mainstream scientific opinion today. But in all the ‘talk’ about mental health, we hear very little of this. Sugar itself has become as sacred as mental health; you have to be careful what you say, people are fragile. In a mollycoddled world, nothing that gives you stress can be prescribed to you. If the prospect of a 5km jog every other day and a life without flour and sugar upsets you, the famous are not going to suggest that.

There is another danger of letting celebrities take control of a conversation. A legitimate way for the famous to make money is by talking about stuff. What if their words on health are funded by a business? If I ran a US pharmaceutical company with a monopoly drug for a psychiatric illness and wanted to expand my market to places like India where few took medicines for “melancholia”, I would persuade Indian celebrities that they need to talk about what they are going through—no products, no endorsements, just talk about your feelings.

If the US Central Intelligence Agency could fund the globalization of Russian literature, why cannot a pharma company get behind “let’s talk about mental health”? Unless, this has already happened.

In the physical world, this happens in obvious ways. For instance, sportstars promote drinks filled with sugar as “rehydration”, and shoe companies sponsor ‘conversations’ about amateur running.

Also, the more that ambassadors of mental health are feted, the more they are encouraged to offer healing tips. That brings to me the image of a large feeble man who has diabetes imparting his views on physical health. Eat like me, he says, work out like me, think like me, be me. This can never happen. Actually, this can happen because anything can happen these days, but he will never become a prophet of physical health. Yet, this might be what’s happening in mental health. The most influential ambassadors of mental health are in poor mental health. The articulation of mental health today is not only the testimonial of the ailing. It also has those who promise a path to something called “wellness”. And many of these people who have solutions for poor mental health may not be sane at all. They are probably influential because they have deluded themselves into believing they have found a path to joy.

The ideal model of mental fitness would be a person who seeks happiness, and finds it in occupation and preoccupation, who gets bored now and then, but not so deeply that it becomes sorrow, whose sorrows are caused only by remarkable events and not by the mere gloom of twilight or the sight of a white car, who is not in an environment where the ideas of mentally-ill intellectuals are passed off as pursuits of a better world. To be precise, a banal person. Not only is such an unremarkable person of no interest to anyone, he or she is not allowed to comment on poor mental health because mental traumas are so sacred today that only people who have experienced its agony are allowed to talk publicly about it. In effect, it is like a world where diabetics have a monopoly over all conversations about physical health. What can go wrong?

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Mohammad Shami, and our misguided obsession with internet trolls


2021-10-31

I do not say no Hindu would ever hold such a dim view of a Muslim cricketer. There are so many humans around, and so many with access to the internet, that everything that can be said can be found online. That is why it is absurd to accord any importance to the abuse of a few, whose size cannot be ascertained and identities cannot be established, not even whether they are human.

On the other hand, there is circumstantial evidence that India’s Hindu mainstream, or even a substantial fringe group, does not endorse the insult of Shami. The evidence is in the behaviour of famous cricketers.

Many Indians were annoyed a few days ago when the Indian cricket team knelt in support of the Black Lives Matter movement, because our cricketers are yet to take on any social injustice in India. But then, that is precisely why they knelt. It was easy. You are woke when it is safe, low-stakes and you have nothing to lose, and when you need to fill a quota of human goodness as cheaply as possible. The fact that such luminaries came out in support of Shami says something notable. If Indian cricketers find the courage to take a stand, it means it is not controversial to do so.

Even Sachin Tendulkar, who tends to keep his peace, came out in support of Shami. Recently, Tendulkar had kept quiet when his former colleague Wasim Jaffer resigned as a state coach in protest against the allegations of some officials that he promoted Muslims. But the same superstar was brave enough to “stand behind Shami”. He could bet he would not get into trouble because almost nobody in India thinks Shami can go soft on Pakistan.

An annoying habit that “some people” have on social media is whining about “some people” when they want to whine about one specific person. This need to exaggerate the size of those you loathe is also behind most overreactions to foolish statements made by a tiny number of people, or bots.

Every day, self-absorbed folks get agitated by the views of a minuscule minority, and announce the death of India. They do not want to believe that in a vast society, zero can never be zero. Dozens, even hundreds or thousands, should be considered zero. How many trolls make a society? How many people constitute a bloc? Actually, how many people make a minority? How many horrible tweets make for a national crisis?

These may appear to be abstract immeasurable quantities, but they are not. They are quantifiable approximations. The weight of substantial opinions, including minority opinions, can usually be felt. And the lightness of insane comments by very few, too, can be felt—as in the case of the Shami episode, which even had Tendulkar saying what needed to be said.

But then, just as megalomaniacs like to exaggerate the numbers of “some people” who say nasty things about them, people with strong ideological views or other psychological disorders tend to accord disproportionate respect to fringe statements.

There is a practice among naive writers and journalists. They land in a new city, take a taxi and then get infatuated with the observations made by their taxi-driver. Taxi-driver journalism is one of the most meaningless forms of writing. If he has said something everyone is saying, then what is the point? If he has said something remarkable, then it could be just his view. Of late, people have found a way to do worse than taxi-driver-journalism. They make up quotations of the taxi driver. And that too is transmitted on the internet, which helps career lamenters lament the decay of a society.

I do not say that we have to be dismissive of fringe opinion. Its subscribers may be close to zero, but they are not air. Also, sometimes a fringe opinion may signify a view that many people harbour but will never say aloud. And that means a fringe opinion may portend a future mainstream opinion. Let us not forget, even in the 80s, Hindu nationalism itself was a secret yearning among many intellectuals, bureaucrats and teachers who knew they would be penalized if they revealed themselves. In any case, only wounded thoughts are infectious, and wounded thoughts usually emerge from a sentimental minority. All transmission of ideas are conducted by charged minorities. And, a very small group of people with strong opinions can cause damage.

Also, overreacting to the fringe has benefits. Statistically, emotionally and literarily, most of the world is moderate. A problem with the moderate condition is that it is not very impressive, so moderates find it hard to transmit their views. So, the occasional overreaction by self-absorbed activists to some ridiculous statements can convey the full force of the reasonable majority and hence serve to reassure everyone.

Even so, the ease with which fringe ideas garner attention is absurd. And it creates a bleak and inaccurate portrait of a society. On most days, we need to give majority opinion a chance to win.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Disturbing movies and why people watch them


2021-11-07

Is watching human misery a form of entertainment? Is the display of torture art, journalism or sadism? Or, is it just that entertainment is not all there is in the lure of stories? Is a story then a device that delivers truth? But then if it is truth that we seek, why do we need a story for that? Are we like those children who need sugar to drink bitter medicine? Or, are we such suckers for emotion that we seek even grief ? Or, maybe we are so vain we seek our own biographies in stories, even if it is a miserable story. After all, the most corrupt quality in writers is that they make you do that corrupt thing with their stories—“relate to it”.

But then, most of us will not be able to find even a moment of our lives in Jai Bhim. Yet, it is a film that is clearly meant for us, or at least the subscribers of Amazon’s Prime Video on which it began streaming a few days ago. Made by T.J. Gnanavel, it is a fictional telling of a true event: Many years ago, a few labourers in Tamil Nadu were arrested for theft and tortured in police custody.

The film is gripping and intelligent, but also difficult to watch. Our ambassador in the film is not any of the doomed labourers, but a person who is a lot like us, played by Suriya, who looks expensive even though he plays an angry lawyer-activist. He is a fierce Tamil hero who walks in slow motion to places where he still manages to reach before his foes. He fights for justice, and finds it. Thus, in the end, we win. Our man, who is highly literate and whose world is framed in English, defeats the evil semi-literates and liberates the illiterates. Still, the sorrow only abates towards the end; it never goes away.

Does watching a film about social injustice make us feel that we are contributing to social justice?

As things are, we are perhaps beneficiaries of many atrocities, including custodial torture. It is not our fault, but we are beneficiaries. How else could India, even though an inefficient nation, also be one of the safest places on earth for the rich and the middle classes? To a far larger extent than many care to admit, it is through the suspension of human rights for the poor. What India cannot achieve through systems and planning, it achieves through informal means. For the poorest of the poor in India, the consequences of breaking the law or even being falsely accused of breaking it, are so severe that it serves as a deterrent. The terror of jail also makes the poor subservient to their masters. That is how we are a nation where the poor are hardly allowed any swag.

All this will change one day, as it already is in some ways. In the future, there will be situations that will unsettle us all, but for now we are beneficiaries. So assured are we that we need to fulfil our quota of goodness through the facile act of watching a film on social justice.

It is not surprising that such a film would invoke Bhimrao Ambedkar, who, for most of the film’s target audience, is an icon who fought against caste inequality. The film’s title Jai Bhim itself is a tribute to Ambedkar. But there is a reason why this is absurd.

When I used to write a column for The New York Times, some days my editors did not understand my language. For example, my use of the word ‘tribal’ as a noun. I could never convince the newspaper that ‘Tribals’ were a classification of people widely used in India. The use of the adjective ‘tribal’ as a noun was one of the errors of Indian-English that eventually became the norm. But there is another word that is used for ‘Tribals’ that the world thinks is figurative but it is more precise than even Indians realize—’outcaste’.

Many Indians think ‘outcaste’ is a term used to depict the ‘lowest’ of four caste groups. That is not true. ‘Outcaste’ means exactly what the word says. Shudras, who were ranked the ‘lowest’ of the four groups in that hierarchy, were traditionally farmers, traders and craftsmen. Today, they are not ‘Dalits’, as some may think. Most of the caste groups that were under the ‘Shudra’ classification are today widely known as Other Backward Classes (OBCs). ‘Tribals’ were people who were outside the traditional caste system, hence they were the original ‘outcastes’, whom even the ‘lowest’ castes treated poorly. The villains in Jai Bhim who treat ‘Tribals’ in inhuman ways are not Brahmin, but members of ‘low’ castes, the constituency of Ambedkar, who himself was higher up the sub-hierarchy among ‘low castes’.

Not all Dalits admire the legacy of Ambedkar. For instance, Ants Among Elephants: An Untouchable Family and the Making of Modern India, the memoirs of a Dalit woman named Sujatha Gidla, has no obeisance to Ambedkar at all. Thus, we watched a ‘social commentary’ about ‘Tribals’ that assumes the pre-eminence of Ambedkar, without fully understanding all the undercurrents.

As I was raised in Madras, I could see the authenticity of the portrayal of ‘Tribals’ in Jai Bhim. This is how they really look today, and they look as doomed as the Tribal labourers from my childhood. All that activism across the years on their behalf by posher people has not changed their lives and fates. Maybe, if Tamil Nadu had been a capitalistic society, instead of a melodramatic and idealistic place, ‘Tribals’ would have fared better.

This film, which has probably done more for them than many agitations, is a triumph of capitalism. An American online retail store run by one of the world’s richest men invested in an entertainment platform that wishes to captivate beneficiaries of social injustice with stories about social justice.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





What startup entrepreneurs could learn from writers


2021-11-14

The past few days, people who follow the news began to see images of a sari-clad entrepreneur who they would soon learn is the founder of the online retail store, Nykaa. After her company began trading on Indian stock markets last week, Falguni Nayar became a billionaire, and hence another inspiring figure. Inspiration is a feeling people get when they derive from successful people all the wrong causes and impediments of success. And so there was much talk about her age, the fact that she was 50 when she started her business, that she was a woman, and so on. What people never know are the actual reasons for someone’s success.

Even so, inspiration is the most powerful emotion of our times. Feeling it, seeking it. It emerges from a subdued form of sorrow called hope. Across Indian cities today, the young and the middle-aged wish to be entrepreneurs. They wish to be rich. Working for a company is merely a temporary arrangement until an exceptional idea comes to them, or until they execute such an idea that has already come to them. Or, maybe, most of them don’t have ideas. They want to be wealthy entrepreneurs but they don’t know yet what their enterprise is going to be, even though they do love that quote about how wealth is a by-product of doing what you love. One thing inspiring people don’t tell you is that you need more luck to realize what you love than to make money.

Despite the dullness and illogic of most successful entrepreneurs, millions seek to absorb insights from them. As the hopeful wait, they routinely hear of some startup raising millions in some round, or a new company going for an initial public offer. What does so much inspiration, hope and intended imitation do to a society? It makes people unhappy, jealous, bitter and other things that are useful for success. But they need one more layer of information.

A few years ago, I was invited by a publisher to be in conversation with the British-Pakistani writer, Mohsin Hamid, to discuss his new novel, How to Get Filthy Rich in Rising Asia. Once members of the audience started asking questions, I figured why they had come. They thought the book was a serious how-to-get-rich guide. But in a way, they were in the right place. There is much that aspiring entrepreneurs can learn from writers. Also, from filmmakers and other artists. People don’t realise that artists are entrepreneurs. I wish I could say what you need to learn from them is how to be. And maybe you can. But they offer a more valuable lesson in what not to be. They are a foreboding of what is going to happen to you and why you have to be a better person than a writer and others of that bent.

It is possible that the reason writers and art filmmakers talk so much about public ethics and morality is that they have very little of these in their private lives. All of us have a quota of goodness we need to fulfil. So people who do not know how to be kind at home are often the ones who speak of macro-kindness, of national or global proportions. But one strand of their public morality also comes from the bitterness of failure and jealousy. That is why they commonly attack their more successful peers on moral and ideological grounds.

The recent success of young and middle-class entrepreneurs has created the notion that the startup culture emerges from equal opportunity. This is largely a myth because there is a lot of social equity hidden in startup funding. Yet, strong perceptions of merit persist in this new economy, and that deepens the sense of failure in a majority who are yet to make it. And I am beginning to see the same sad circles of disgruntled people as seen in the arts, wasting their time talking ill of those who have made it.

I do not wish to deny anyone the agony of envy. After all, it is a natural sentiment between equals, and all talented people who believe they are worthy of success would feel envious of their more successful peers. But when envy turns into sustained bitterness, it causes hyper-morality, which is the prevailing madness in the artistic world. Behind those men who call other men “misogynists”, behind the accusations of “bigotry”, behind the moral indignation of the art-house is usually just petty jealousy and a subconscious attempt to eliminate competition.

I see this happening among talented entrepreneurs whose startups are languishing. Their sense of failure and jealousy makes them speak the language of social morality. When we think we’re better than others, we tend to lose our humour, and humour is not merely the ability to be funny. It is the ability to laugh at our own circumstances, and that is a form of clarity. When people surrender their clarity, they unwittingly get recruited in larger political and corporate games.

Mainstream commercial art is a democracy where public opinion delivers either rewards or punishment. But for the middle and high arts, a cartel decides for all of us what is good. Here, validation is the currency. This infection has already permeated the very heart of our new capitalism. Disenchanted entrepreneurs who have been denied material success seek compensation in more abstract kinds of validation. At an innocuous level, they do things like creating a corrupt culture of awards and prestige. At a more serious level, their disenchantment has transformed into hyper-moral activism.

For instance, some disgruntled entrepreneurs who have taken to posturing call themselves “ethicists”, and some of them create or fan fears around technology, privacy, enterprise and billionaires. And what was denied to them in the form of material success, they make up through acclaim.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





How the government lost farm reforms to rich farmers


2021-11-21

Once Prime Minister Narendra Modi could deny Indians their own cash for several days, and not only survive the stunt, politically, but thrive. Now his government has had to take back a plan that may have enriched the poor, a plan I want to present in half a sentence. But then, it is hard to avoid the messiness of its details, a reason why our most famous storyteller could not market his most humane attempt yet to liberate Indian farmers.

On Friday, about 14 months after his party enacted three farm bills, he told the nation they would be repealed. It was a triumph for rich north Indian farmers and the rural middle-class movement they led. Many urban humanitarians, too, rejoiced. And if you were clueless about India, like a conscientious Barbadian singer who has a good heart but is too busy to read policy, you may think the three farm laws of Modi’s government are filled with evil designs to rob and torture poor Indian farmers (and then somehow win elections after doing that).

In reality, those laws were reforms that intellectuals have talked about for decades. They aimed to free farmers constrained to sell their produce at state-designated marketplaces, usually done through profiteering middlemen; thus also free them to sell their crops online or through private contracts; and free the market from an old law that marks some superstar crops as “essential” commodities that cannot be hoarded in large qualities, paving the way for corporations to buy directly from small farmers.

If the laws were so good, you may wonder, why should farmers object? They were told a good story, and like most good stories, it was simple and scary, and it was told by their rich.

Affluent farmers of Punjab and Haryana gain the most from an old procurement policy under which the government guarantees a floor price for major crops. These farmers are entrepreneurs but do not face all the risks of entrepreneurship. They could have gained the most from the new laws, too, but then why risk revolutionary change when the current system suits them? They have no incentive to experiment with other crops instead of dumping rice and wheat on the government. Why should they risk change? So, they told a story, not entirely implausible, that minimum support prices would end; that farmers will be at the mercy of the market, that they will be left dependent on big companies that will offer high prices at first but eventually squeeze them dry. And, what if this is the start of a devious corporatization of farming? What if all this leads the government to withdraw as a big buyer, and what if free or cheap electricity and other subsidies vanish, and worse, what if farmers are asked to start paying income tax?

Rich and middle-class farmers were afraid of change and they sabotaged reform for the poor while claiming the moral high ground. Same old story.

Also, most protesting farmers were led to believe that according to the new laws, if they had disputes with corporations, they would not easily be able to go to court. This is true, but the new laws offered an alternative dispute-resolution mechanism manned by government servants and private players. Foes of change framed this as a system where bureaucrats would play judges. The way some people lamented this dispute-resolution system, you would think Indians love their courts and judges.

The farmers’ movement, like the anti-corruption movement earlier, was an upper-class political movement that recruited the rest. Just as the Congress party could not counter the anti-corruption movement, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) could not fight the farmers’ moralizing story with its own story because the farm laws, however good as policy, were a terrible yarn. It did not have a clear villain. Procurement agents were not as appealing as villains compared to the imagery of Indian farmers being enslaved by Reliance, Walmart, the Adani Group or “a new East India Company”. Also, the defence of the reforms was in the details. Our doom as a species is in the fact that stories are a poor medium for complexity, and stories control the world.

Not just that, the BJP told a very bad story in a very bad way. For instance, it got some of the richest actors and cricketers to defend its reforms. These celebrities earn by endorsing brands. So even their admirers know they are paid message peddlers. Why would you use famous liars to tell the truth? Also, the party was unable to draw farmers in other states to demonstrate their support for reforms. There is a reason for this. The fuel of an agitation is lament, not optimism. No agitation in support of something can be as electrifying as an agitation that is against something.

It is not as though those who protested the farm bills did not have good reasons. All the reassuring elements of the new laws were hypothetical and set in a distant abstract future. And, the Modi government’s record on the execution of its esoteric ideas has been very poor. Actually, forget revolutionary ideas, the BJP is unable to even fix roads and street lights in places where it controls both the state and municipal administrations. Also, the covid pandemic’s second wave hurt the reputations of Modi and his party.

So, what now? Many of the reformist ideas proposed are already in practice in several states, like the freedom of farmers to sell outside designated marketplaces. Otherwise, things will continue as before. And poor farmers will one day cease to be poor farmers, when they become poor security guards and factory workers. Some of the refined foes of farm reforms will then write heartbreaking poems about poor landless migrants.





Cryptos of the mind that New India no longer accepts


2021-11-28

India is a village. Bitcoin is a hippie city. So, I wonder why India took so long to express its contempt for cryptocurrencies. Whatever be the cause of delay, very soon it will pass a diktat in its grand panchayat that cryptos will be banned from entering the village unless it wears more modest clothes.

Cryptos represent the sort of absolute freedom that emerges now and then from the West. Specifically from a Western system that converts thought experiments into human rights. Cryptos are encrypted digital currencies that users can exchange among themselves with no need for a government, a king, a central bank or commercial banks, or even courts and law enforcement. Why must the Indian government diminish itself by allowing a competing currency? The only anarchy India permits are protests and driving.

Cryptos have sophisticated technological foundations, like blockchain, which creates an eternal record of a given process that is extremely difficult to tamper. India wants to adopt such technologies, and some people tell me that it may even accept some cryptos as legitimate investments, but can’t permit an alternate usable currency, that too one which lends anonymity to users. India does not see all absolute freedoms as human rights.

Like cryptos, there are many freedoms that emerge from Western politics, thought experiments, melancholia, and often common sense. I like to call these freedoms cryptomorals. They are not only freedoms, but freedoms that challenge the state, or aim for some utopia that takes the logic of democracy to absurd ends. In any case, they are all inventions that became religions. Here are some of the most popular cryptomorals: cryptocurrencies, of course; electoral democracy; direct democracy; privacy; freedom of expression; feminism, free trade; globalization; secularism; climate activism, human-rights activism; borderless internet; net neutrality; the right to be forgotten.

Once, the West’s ability to transmit ideas was so strong and influential Indians were so in awe of the West that India adopted some of these abstractions as unquestionable ideals. But now, as the nature of influence in India has changed and the village takes back control from cultural orphans, modern India has relegated cryptomorals to the status of mere ideas, some of them even bad ones.

At the time of freedom, India had no choice but to accept the wisdom of democracy, which remains the most influential cryptomoral to come from the West. Even today, outside China, an overwhelming majority of people consider democracy the only moral form of government. Not the most moral, but the only moral form.

India does not seriously challenge the goodness of democracy. But our nation is not a proper democracy. We are a good electoral democracy, if you do not believe the lament about faulty voting machines. But India has rejected many other subsidiary cryptomorals of democracy. For instance, in India freedom of expression is conditional. Your right to be hurt by just about anything is greater than someone’s right to tell a joke. India is a paradise for the offended. Typically, our lower courts deny you freedom and higher courts express grand ideals in poor English.

Whatever freedom of speech that exists in India emerged not from any Nehruvian magnanimity; rather, it emerges from the practicality of India’s rustic electoral democracy where politicians trash-talk their rivals and the news media reports their campaigns.

India does not take seriously the cryptomoral of direct democracy, which requires referendums on major legislative moves. The main argument of direct democracy is that parliaments are obsolete intermediaries, an invention of a time when there was no way people in Madras could be heard in a building in Delhi where laws are made. Today, anyone anywhere can be heard. Blockchain technology can be used to make voting so secure that no one can allege fraud. But India, like many nations, feels that just because something is easy, it does not mean it is better.

The US evangelical mechanism once succeeded in making free trade and globalization sacred ideas in India. Any politician or intellectual who questioned these risked being portrayed as a socialist simpleton. But modern India challenges all these concepts now in its search for its best interests. The cryptomoral of secularism, too, was sacred until Hindu nationalism showed it up as a useless word for atheism. In India, secularism does not mean a godless state; it means all gods have equal rights to torment you.

The idea of privacy is a relatively recent invention. It is not hard to see the connection between privacy and dignity; but the self-importance and paranoia that accompanies all talk of it today is a part of contemporary urban megalomania. Privacy is a cryptomoral that India’s government wants others to respect even as it spies on its citizens with no consequences for those who enable this.

The internet came to India as an unstoppable borderless force that “was designed to survive a world war”. But India now regulates the internet and controls its gateways. Net neutrality was a major cryptomoral just a few years ago. According to it, a service provider should be barred by law from giving faster or cheaper user access to software applications willing to pay more. But today this neutrality is violated routinely and few seem to care.

In some parts of the world, many of these freedoms grew so popular that it was difficult for governments to deny them to people. This happened with the internet across the world. Even so, many beautiful things begin as freedoms and end up heavily regulated. In the new world, freedom is never taken, it is granted.





The war on fun and what it has cost us


2021-12-05

India is at war with fun. Our list of sacred cows, which includes the actual cow, is getting longer. It is perilous to post a video of your filmy dance on Instagram if a temple is in its frame, or any religious element for that matter. All religions have an equal right to be offended. Stand-up comedians are running out of things to say. Humour is a risk. Laughter is the reward, and the punishment for failure used to be the silence of the audience, but now it is possible jail time. Online streaming channels are scared of almost everything that matters to entertainment. Filmmakers have surrendered to the “atmosphere”. You cannot wear the national flag, only string it to a pole. And if at all beef finds mention on a hotel menu, it is usually hidden in asterisks as though it is a password. If you want to experience state efficiency, get offended by something related to either divinity or nudity. Even people who are offended complain that their freedom of expression has been suffocated. New India really is a type of air.

Deceived by the myth of cosmic justice, you may think there will be severe consequences for India. All this suffocation, you want to say, will result in some great crisis. But what crisis? Financial losses? An exodus of the rich? I think stifling fun and freedom will not cost India much. It will get away.

People talk a lot about freedom, but they choose many other things over it. That is why they flock to Singapore, or at least until it shut its doors to keep out covid. The city-state is among the most sought-after places in the world to reside in, and it is alluring even to citizens of liberal nations. There is no freedom of expression there, but there is order, and material prospects, which appear to matter more to most people, at least for a while.

The way some people lament “the current climate” in India, you would think it was a paradise of free speech before the ascent of Hindu nationalism. But Independent India was never truly a free place. It was just that offence was disorganized, like everything else. So, if you were an artist or editor, you could get away because of pure inertia, or just luck. Now offence is better organized. A system is in place for just about anyone to complain and law enforcers to take it seriously. This works so well because very few Indians believe in absolute free speech.

Once Mohandas Gandhi sent a note to the famous cartoonist Shankar. “Your cartoons… do not speak accurately and cannot joke without offending, you will not rise high in your profession… Above all you should never be vulgar. Your ridicule should never bite.” This was the prophet of freedom speaking.

It was a wrong advice to give a cartoonist, but it encodes an under-appreciated reason why Gandhi was so popular—he was a lot like the typical Indian. Even today, most reasonable Indians believe that you can say stuff, but not if it hurts others. This is probably also the view of most of the world. Free speech, however, emerges from a very different way of thinking, as expressed by the actor and writer Stephen Fry: “It’s now very common to hear people say, ‘I’m rather offended by that.’… It has no meaning; it has no purpose; it has no reason to be respected as a phrase. ‘I am offended by that.’ Well, so [bleep] what?”

This attitude creates a kind of fun that is of very high quality. The intent of irreverence is not irreverence, but not to waste energy trying not to be irreverent. This freedom creates not only entertainment, but also literature and science. It is a blissful state of objectivity, a tremendous neural bridge that connects the creator and the receiver. But the option to offend matters to very few people: artists, philosophers, journalists and the kind of people who are none of these but claim to be all—activists.

Even among artists, philosophers and journalists, very few want the option to offend because they wish to be harmless, or they are just plain frightened of trouble. So, even among creative folks and their audience, there is no big demand for offensive fun. In this world there is perhaps greater demand for cryptos than freedom of expression. That is another reason why India will get away by stifling fun.

Artistic freedom is extremely important to people like me who earn a living from it. So we tend to overstate its moral force. Maybe many of us, self-obsessed as we are, even believe what is important to us is important to others. And artists and journalists, who have a vested interest in free expression, have a disproportionate influence on generating lament. But most people are indifferent or even opposed to complete artistic freedom.

To an extent I do like this suffocation, it’s because I find it challenging. Look at a nation with greater artistic freedom, say the UK. What are its writers doing with their freedom? Their comedians can say anything they want about their Queen or anyone. Their humour has no risks. It is low-stakes, facile and hence unfunny. On the other hand, even a high-school level poem by an Indian comedian about “two Indias” can go viral.

Freedom of expression is not the only form of fun there is. In fact, most people are more entertained by material fun, like wining and dining and amusement parks. In this, too, India is against fun. Restaurants and bars thrive not because of India, but despite it. They are harassed by many wings of the government, which in turn offers them nothing more than chaos. But in the end, the forces of capitalism help the leisure industry survive India. Still, what has been achieved is unremarkable even by third-world standards. Indian cities are dreary places. India pays a price for that. If you are going to be a sensitive bore, you need to offer something else.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





Kung fu pandas and other such disciples in our midst


2021-12-12

This is a golden age for self improvement. People can become better people in many ways. In fact, calling this pursuit ‘self-help’ is like calling a doctor, ‘doctor’. It may be correct but too vague. It is instead called ‘entrepreneurship’, ‘mindfulness’, ‘fine arts’, ‘philosophy’, ‘spirituality’, ‘creative writing’ and many other such things. I am thrilled, because so many people will become better people very soon, and then they will do another course to become even better. From what I have seen around me, the habitual, perennial mentees are of seven types.

The Kung Fu Pandas: In the animation film Kung Fu Panda, a bumbling panda with low self-esteem loves kung fu and wants to become good at it. He is dissatisfied with the masters available to him, and leads a life of regret. But then a string of accidents leads him to a worthy kung fu master far away from home—an ancient tortoise.

I know some Kung Fu Pandas. They are passionate fans of an art form, and they wish to learn. They are in pursuit of a mentor, but disenchanted with the gurus available to them, who are close home or of their own cultural type. Their low self-worth makes them feel that what is available to them or what reaches out to them must be worthless. They invariably find their master in a person who is racially different. The Indian panda, for instance, would find his master in a wise Caucasian tortoise.

Kung Fu Pandas are driven by a curse. They are of middling talent in the art they so love. Not so bad that they need not bother with it, but not so good that they can be great. So they need the social networks of useful people. Thus they are friendly and respectful, and as they are not too gifted, they are unthreatening, all of which leads to their initial success that they wrongly attribute to their racially-different Master.

Devotees of the Mind: A few years ago, I went to meet an Israeli called Lior Suchard who said he was “a mind-reader”. He is among the people who have said that humans “use only 1% of their brain”. By that they mean unlike most people, they use much more of their brain, which is how they bend spoons and tell you the name of your first girlfriend. Many people do not wish to consider this magic; they want to believe in the mystical nature of the mind, the reason why Suchard makes a good living. A workshop he held in Gurgaon to inform corporate managers how to use “the full potential” of their minds was attended by dozens of executives whose giant companies paid ₹16,000 per mind for it.

The mind has to be the most common subject of self-improvement. The typical Devotee of the Mind is a person who thinks he is “scientific”, by which he means that he will believe anything agreeable that a person with impressive scientific credentials says, including nonsense. As a result, if you have a ‘neuro’ in your past or present job description, you can say a lot of abstract things about the mind, meditation and inner peace.

But the fact is that the mind is the least understood part of an animal. What we know today about the mind is almost the same as what people knew a thousand years ago, except for the general acceptance today that the mind is not the heart.

The Sports Analogy Consumer: A parable is an absurd form of a story. In a parable, one improbable event occurs—like say, a hare and a tortoise agree to have a race. And using this improbable event, the parable conveys an improbable moral. (Yet, parables sell more than my books.) The modern parable improves on the ancient form. In the modern parable, a true event is used by a mentor to tell you what you can do to succeed. Sports events are a special favourite. For instance, a guy will do a corporate workshop on ‘Roger Federer’s Lessons in Endurance’. Or, if a dull mediocre football team wins a major tournament, there will be some seminars on why team work is greater than individual genius.

There are hundreds of thousands of Analogy Consumers who are willing to see moral and practical messages in sports that can somehow transform their lives. Naturally, to meet the great demand for this, suppliers of Sports Analogy have roped in some of the greatest athletes who talk tangentially about how others can apply their sporting ways. For instance, Steve Waugh and Saurav Ganguly would be hired now and then to speak about ‘leadership’.

Among the other major subscribers of self-improvement are The Tradition Miners, who adore any principle as long as it is very ancient. For instance, every thing Chanakya said in the Arthashastra. Or some Innuit observation. But generally, the moral has to be not only ancient but also from scriptures of the forward caste or dominant race that has won the culture wars.

And, there are The Autobiography Seekers. I do not mean they seek the autobiographies of legends—that is a very different market. Instead, The Autobiography Seekers are self-absorbed people who think they are seeking self-improvement, but in reality they seek stories that remind them of themselves. And, there are The Masochists, who are hardwired to rate a difficult method highly and be suspicious of methods that are easy, pain-free and pleasurable.

And, there are also The Secret Disciples, like columnists who appear to lampoon people who wish to be better, but are in the throes of self-improvement themselves. Maybe they think that if they are secretive about something, it must be very important.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





The tyranny of background music in our public spaces


2021-12-19

In some restaurants, the music is so loud that you wonder why people are made to sit facing each other. In most cafes, the music is faint but you know it is there, like invisible fumes from vehicles. Wherever you go today, music seeps out of speakers. In restaurants, cafes, elevators, lobbies, airports, aircraft cabins, trains and taxies. It is there in films, of course, even when characters are talking, or when they are dead, or when a deaf person watches the world go by. There is no greater absurdity in art than background music. It is also there in exercise lessons on YouTube, cooking shows, wildlife documentaries and journalism. Most cat videos don’t have music only because pet owners do not know how to add it, or it takes too much effort.

It is as though the world is afraid of silence. Somehow we have reached a place where silence has become a form of gloom, or foreboding, like an omen in a marriage that some misdemeanour has been committed.

The defence of background music in real life is that it creates ‘a mood’, and ‘an ambience’. But there are several flaws in this hypothesis. Who can claim to know what music creates what mood in you?

A few days ago, in the lobby of a hotel in Mumbai, I heard Nessun Dorma, the melancholy aria. Maybe the hotel wished to convey class, but then what is the neural connection between European operatic melancholy and the new rich of Mumbai in an orbit around an Indian buffet? Also, the context of that aria is this: An unexpected stranger manages to win a contest to marry a princess, but she finds him repulsive; so he says if you guess my name, kill me. But if you can’t guess my name, you must marry me. And the psychotic princess then decrees that the people of her kingdom must find out his name, or all of them would be killed. Nessun Dorma is the lament of the suitor for how much he wants this weird lady. Who would want this sort of ‘mood’? Is a mood then a consequence of not knowing too much about the music, the very source of the mood?

Even if you don’t know the context or history of a piece of music, it can be torture. For a few years, one Delhi airport terminal played Hindi film songs from the 1980s, most of which were a disgrace to anyone with eardrums. Not only that, jingles were played in between. Most people did not mind.

Even today, most people seem unaffected by background music. They even seem to want it. The persistence of this music everywhere is a part of the tyranny of the majority. As a result, some of the greatest classics of the European enlightenment have become air in a lobby, a mere sound to comfort people who are unsettled by silence.

When you turn off the ambient music, it ejects people from ‘the mood’, and without it, they get bored. Cab drivers tend to display a dislike of customers who ask them to turn off the music. They usually only turn down the sound because the air is too still for them otherwise.

I have heard several people wonder how “real life” would feel if it had background music, “like in the movies”. By this they mean that an event in their lives would be followed by their mood, and the mood would be followed by appropriate music. But this is the exact reverse of what happens in cinema. The background music not only creates the mood, it anticipates an event, and even defines the very genre of the film.

In cinema, and many other things that cinema is called today (‘series’ for example), music is more than ambience; it is a very specific and powerful nudge.

Not just that.

Without background music, time expands and a story becomes very real. In fact, many art-house films are overestimated as realism only because they don’t have background music.

Just as silence is adored a bit too much by art house and its disciples, the mainstream has an excess of background score.

For instance, Marvel’s superhero films are so filled with anthem-like music that a moment of silence is the actual music, which lends the required gravitas.

The most foolish use of background score in mainstream cinema is when filmmakers use it to cue dialogues. I want to ask them—are you so unsure of your lines, or do you have such low regard for the faculties of people who watch your films that you need to create a mood for dialogues?

The tyranny of background music in mainstream big-budget cinema has created a situation where you cannot really follow dialogues anymore without reading the accompanying subtitles. Christopher Nolan’s Tenet was in particular focus for unintelligible dialogues because its background score is so overpowering. Not that the film would have made much sense even if you understood the dialogues.

However, this is not the most corrupt or absurd use of background music in mass communication. That is, if you have seen some of the new sanctimonious ‘documentaries’ that have been coming out of the United States. The use of alarmist music in journalism is as much a violation of the profession’s promise to convey the truth as any bias or activist agenda.

A good thing about reading is that it is safe from background music. But I think, a day will arrive when a publisher would come up with the idea of introducing background music to an e-book.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous’





How ‘The Matrix’ was a massive spiritual experience


2021-12-26

I was 25, and watched the film alone at Sterling Cinema in South Mumbai. It was that sort of a film; you remember details. As the fourth instalment of The Matrix releases now, many years after the trilogy was completed, let me remind you that in 1999, The Matrix was a global spiritual experience. I have met people who have missed its entire subtext and who think it was just a confusing greenish sci-fi film, but they are very few.

Before I walked into Sterling, I had not read a word about the film. So, a few minutes in, I was stunned. Or consumed by a great spiritual smugness. You see, the film was about me.

At 17, I was Neo in Madras; there was even a Morpheus. What happened was, one day, when a friend and I were alone in a big house something significant occurred. He started looking weird. Then he told me nothing is as it appears; there is something else out there. I got it immediately.

We were not so cool as the characters in The Matrix only because we were tropical, and did not require so many layers of black clothes. In fact, my Morpheus and I arrived at the theory that it is hard for people in cold nations to attain enlightenment because they are forever in the frivolous self-regard of excess costumes.

In Sterling Cinema, I thought that only I and very few people knew that the world around us is just a simulation, and that there was a way to find the truth. I was a bit surprised that Americans knew this too, but I was confident they were also very few. I thought most people will not get the film. They were, after all, like the extras in Matrix, too deep in the simulation to see the outer halos of reality. But then, in the coming days, I realized that everyone got it. I was very annoyed and disappointed. Everyone got it? That easy?

Even so, I discovered, there were two kinds of people. A majority who knew the theory of spiritual awakening, and those who had a closer experience with it because of a certain mental state, mental disorder, sorrow or drugs. People who want to believe in an alternate reality are people who do not enjoy the original reality.

The idea that the observable physical world is not real has corroboration in religion and other stories. And even in some theories postulated by scientists, which are often misconstrued as ‘scientific theories’. But the first three Matrix films were a corroboration at unprecedented scale and its impact was deep because it was not a farcical film. Even though it was made by the persuasions of mainstream entertainment, it was unafraid of complexity. It was a film that was prepared to fail.

The true power of spirituality, or philosophy, which is often spirituality for atheists, is in the vagueness of its meaning. As a result, it allows people to misunderstand its creators and messages. Misrepresentation is how people project their own character on to something else, and start admiring that thing without realizing that they are only loving themselves. The film gained from this, as people attributed their own meanings to its many allusions.

The Matrix is about our quest for something better. The film could have followed the formula laid out by all religion: Show truth as a paradise, something infinitely better than what a prophet persuades people to flee. But in The Matrix, the real world is impoverished, tough and grim. All it has going for it is that it is real. That is the film’s greatness. It showed truth need not be utopia.

The most convincing idea of the film is its argument that when people have to choose between an unreal paradise and a very real hell, many will pick the unreal paradise. But then there will be some who will choose truth above everything untrue.

Not all ideas in The Matrix are spiritual, or even philosophical. It hints at phenomena that happen in the real world known to us but do not always see. In the film, ‘the matrix’ is a computer simulation created by advanced machines that have taken over the world. It has inbuilt flaws that allow the rise of human rebels and even rogue programmes. To that end, the matrix is a lot like capitalism. Every time it creates an affluent paradise, people grow disenchanted, they long for conflict, and humanitarians from well-off families arise—beneficiaries of inequality who wage a moral war against inequality. Thus it was not unnatural that Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels hailed from affluent families. And that after them, generations of academics and writers who called themselves Marxists were usually from wealthy families.

There is a scene in the second edition of The Matrix, where our hero, Neo, meets The Architect, the computer programme that has created the matrix. Neo, who is leading the human revolution against the machines, wants to know, “Why am I here?” The Architect gives a tangential answer, “You are the eventuality of an anomaly…”

It is the same in real life. All our heroes who lead the war against capitalism, too, are creations of the very system they wish to dismantle. Their job is not to destroy capitalism because they cannot. Their job is merely to manufacture the hope that capitalism can indeed be destroyed. By promoting mediocre foes, capitalism ensures more threatening enemies never rise.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





What Kerala’s moneylenders understand about India


2022-01-02

I spent a lot of time with one major money-lending family of Kerala. I will refer to them only as ‘Family’.

Their most important brief to their staff is that when a person comes to pawn her gold, it is a very serious moment in her life. So, the staff is instructed to be solemn. They are to abandon laughter, banter and the phone, and respect the moment. It will deeply move my mother—to know that pawnbrokers always knew how she felt.

The Family also follows another important point of decorum, in response to their belief that the moneylender, no matter which village, municipality or era he might be in, is a neighbour, essentially. So small talk must be made with customers, which like most successful small talk is not designed to extract information, but results in its flow anyway.

Most of India’s gold is bought by Malayalees. Yet, you will almost never see women bedecked in gold jewellery, the way Tamilians are. (Jayalalithaa even had a gold belt, which was as large as a wrestlers’ belt.)

Malayalees don’t exactly love gold; they love what gold can do. A marketing executive of the Family told me, “For Malayalees, gold is practical thing. That is why Malayalee gold is often ugly and chunky, and all-gold. There is no stigma in pawning gold anymore in Kerala. Its innate purpose, for a Malayalee, is that it is a collateral.”

Today, 90% of the revenues of Kerala’s big non-banking financial companies comes from gold loans. But this is not going to last. A future looms where the number of Indians who pawn their gold will stagnate or decline.

It was partly this fear of a future crisis that made the Family send a few thousand executives out to spy. Their job was to meet and have a casual conversation with “anyone who conducts an economic activity” and belongs to a segment that conventional banks will not lend to. It was a vast survey of Kerala’s bottom rungs, but the surveyors were asked not to make it look too formal. The Family always got its best information from casual chats.

The employees chatted up over 100,000 men and women and the results confirmed the Family’s fears. Increasingly, most Malayalees did not wish to pawn their gold in times of emergency. Worse, many of them did not have any gold. A set of modern behaviours was eclipsing an economic pattern that was precious to the Family. Malayalees have steadily been prospering, and in a few years, they will not be pawning gold for contingency funds. They may dip into their savings or might even qualify for personal loans from regular banks. They might even assume more fashionable debts through credit cards. This is the reason the Family, like other gold-loan companies in Kerala, have tried expand to the rest of India, but it is inevitable that in just a few years the rest of India, too, will not need gold loans.

This is why the Family decided to get into subprime loans across India, lending to those who represent higher risk. Their existing customers did belong to the bottom 90% of India, but still, people who pawned their gold were among the upper rungs of this group. Now the Family opened its safes to men and women who borrowed from street-corner moneylenders at exorbitant rates of interest because no one else would lend them money.

Most Indians are entrepreneurs. And most of them borrowed for business or for an emergency, or to just survive, and at rates that translate to 48-60% a year, and in some cases, by some measures, many times higher. What fascinated the Family while studying the survey report was that small entrepreneurs could afford exploitative rates. Something about Indian life and prices was structured in a way to absorb the high cost of street loans. The Family decided to lend them ₹10,000-15,000 at 24%.

But the most important feature the Family introduced was not the risky loan. It was equal daily instalments. “The small vendor on the street, he doesn’t have the time to come to us and pay,” the head of the Family told me, “He has to shut his shop to go and pay his interest. Shutting shop for an hour costs money. So we go to him every day.”

All major gold loan corporations in Kerala have extraordinary brand appeal in Kerala. The message that they have conveyed is that they are in a highly moral business, which is to replace the exploitation of street money-lenders, who used to convert clients into bonded slaves, and thereby service a market that the larger impersonal banks did not care about, and also fund poor entrepreneurs whom the government was unable to serve efficiently enough.

But there still is a stigma attached to money-lending. Even though all banks are in the business of lending, non-banking finance companies, especially the Christian money-lenders of Kerala, have to grapple with the moral stain that emerges from Christianity’s reproach of usury.

A German called Jakob Fugger, regarded as among the richest men who ever lived, changed this around 1515 CE. He allegedly bribed Pope Leo, who legitimized profiting from moneylending. But then, later popes reverted the stain. What is beyond dispute, however, is that moneylenders everywhere and in all forms had excellent reasons to exist.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





What widespread vaccine hesitancy says about people


2022-01-09

All their lives, they could never abandon unhealthy food, or set out every morning to perform meaningful exercise. But masking and sitting at home they could do, and they enjoyed the righteousness of doing what was universally considered the right thing. As pandemic articulation increased, they exhibited similar enthusiasm in adopting mainstream scientific ways to shield themselves, which included getting vaccinated. With regular advice so convenient to take, they had no need for spurious alternate medicine.

Different from them in every way, one of the fittest individuals on earth, the top-ranked tennis player today, Novak Djokovic, has questioned the wisdom of vaccines. The Serbian faces deportation from Australia because he is not vaccinated. He is of the view that a human body should be allowed to develop natural immunity to viruses by allowing infection, which has a sound scientific basis (for the fit). He also believes that vaccination is dangerous, which is a view that alarms scientists.

Like many who are obsessed with fitness, and are actually fit, Djokovic appears to have very little respect for conventional wisdom. In the field of fitness, conventional wisdom is designed to appease and protect the lazy majority who yield easily to temptation, and such advice is generally useless or harmful to a talented minority with a high threshold for pain, training and sacrifice.

Not everything Djokovic does is rational. He has a mystical side. He seems to think emotions can interact with water, that some ancient ruins have healing powers, and he has claimed he can move objects through ‘telekinesis’, that thing with a scientific ring to it because it ends in ‘nesis’. And, he speaks with admiration of a doctor who showed him that if he held a bread toast in his hand it would drain his physical strength because gluten does to him what kryptonite does to another famous man. Even so, it is not clear where Djokovic’s suspicion of vaccines comes from. His mystical side? Or his health instinct? His stand against vaccination is not very different from the positions of many health gurus in the West who usually make sense and have followings of sane people who seek liberation from mainstream follies, poisons in common foods and mediocre medical advice.

I am vaccinated, by the way. It makes sense to me because I believe forces of capitalism have driven the pharmaceutical industry to make it safe for me. But many people doubt this.

Till recently, we thought all the anti-vax noise was from a small loony group in the US. But now it is evident that they were a sign, like most extreme groups are, that they are merely one end of a spectrum of thought. Today, it is clear that vaccine hesitancy is widely prevalent across the world. A few days ago, French President Emmanuel Macron said he wished to make life “miserable” in his country for those who resisted vaccination.

What does vaccination hesitancy say about people?

There is no single quality that unites the vaccine-hesitant. They comprise all sorts of people, and they raise insane and reasonable objections. What is clear is that the real master-infection in humans is belief.

We tend to claim we arrive at our beliefs after much investigation of facts. But the fact is that we believe first and then pick evidence that suits us.

When information is scarce or hard to access, people submit to an authoritative view. We know, for instance, that if Indians had poor internet speeds, they would be better informed. But when a society is rich, individualistic, and there are various designer ideas on every issue to choose from, a large number of people tend to question mainstream scientific wisdom.

We appear to pursue facts and truth, but we are also oppressed by them. Much of what we do is to save ourselves from the strangeness of truth and veer towards the interesting paranormal half-truth or lie, even if it is terrifying, as the terrifying is often interesting.

In effect, when we appear to debate health or act on it, it is not really about health at all. Rather, it is about what we find interesting, the process. Just like tea is usually just a way of having sugar, a health debate is mostly just a way of asserting our personality.

There is a very Indian image that comes to mind. It is of an ambulance transporting a heart. The organ is in an ice box and time is of the essence because someone somewhere needs it. A whole section of the city comes to a standstill, roads are block, a scrawny man rushes from the ambulance to the airport, where he has absolute right of way, and when the plane lands with the icebox, another city comes to a standstill as the icebox races to a hospital. Why this makes me laugh is that most people don’t take care of their hearts at all when it is inside their rib cage, but they love the melodrama of transporting a heart for a transplant.

The drama around vaccination is a bit like that. People generally never show any evidence that they wish to be healthy, because it is tedious to do so, but they like the fuss of taking a stand on health, because taking a stand is essentially an extension of their personalities, beliefs and culture.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





Why are printouts checked outside airport terminals?


2022-01-16

Why does the security guard check your air ticket before you walk into a terminal building? It is a practice across all Indian airports. What is he looking for? What people show him is a printed copy of a flight booking or an image of it on their phone. How does the guy know whether what you show him is really a ticket? He does not have a scanner to read the barcode.

He is not like the hotel security guard in a fancy-dress costume who is made to do some dance with his hands. The guy outside the terminal building is armed and can get very serious; he is a cop of the Central Industrial Security Force (CISF), a paramilitary police force. If one of his motives is to dissuade a person from leaving a suitcase bomb inside the airport, how does checking printouts help? Wouldn’t a terrorist fake a ticket, or even buy a real ticket? They have the budget for that. If the idea is to use spurious behavioural theories to spot suspicious characters, who look nervous or sweat profusely or exhibit other traits of people who are up to no good, half of all Indians would probably qualify inadvertently in any situation.

The guards serve a far less glorious purpose than securing the nation—they pretend to secure the nation. Also, the only practical work they accomplish is to discourage underemployed Indians from thronging airport terminals to bid farewell to their relatives. But you can dissuade Indians from bidding farewell to passengers at the airport in simpler ways, like getting them married, or charging a hefty visitors’ fee, many times more than the meagre ₹100 that some airports charge. Or impose a heavy fine on those caught loitering in the terminal without a visitors’ pass. This system has worked very well in controlling entourages at Indian railway stations.

Making thousands of trained guards check tickets outside airport terminals all day and night is among the most useless things our government does. The CISF has requested scanners to read air tickets in a more meaningful way. Even so, what it strives to do with more meaning is still a useless act that can be achieved by much cheaper means. So what if it is useless, you could argue, why should anyone be productive? Isn’t being productive merely another way of wasting time in a universe that has no meaning anyway? This columnist probably takes this argument more seriously than most columnists. But still, it is not a good argument for a reason that is as important as the truth that life itself has no meaning. The meaninglessness of life is very different from the meaninglessness of a guy pretending to check a printout.

There is a difference between doing nothing and enacting a farce. Doing nothing has personality; it is ancient, pleasurable and a defiance of the modern consecration of being busy. A farce, on the other hand, is something bereft of intelligence, an organized way of stealing the time of other people who may want to waste it in other ways.

You can argue that the CISF guards don’t exactly waste your time because even in a scenario where you breeze into the terminal, you will get caught in other queues. But my complaint is against being made an extra in a governmental farce; to be forced to stand in a line that has no meaning; to feel the dumbness of inching ahead in a meaningless moment; to show a ticket for no good reason; and to be a part of a system that makes well-trained young men and women stand for many hours bearing heavy arms just because they are available to be used in this manner by their bosses who did not have better ideas. Why can’t these guards instead be playing a sport, as part of their training? They could be hiking, running, swimming, bowling—all in the national interest. Instead, they are made to spend the best days of their able lives standing there, ruining their spines, and doing something boring and useless. There is pettiness in this, an ancient Indian stinginess often seen in the powerful, a systemic denial of joy to others who have no power to demand it.

Outside India, I have not seen this form of ticket-checking through glances. I do accept I’ve not been to all nations, and there could be other countries where they deploy a paramilitary outfit to perform a farce. But that does not change what it says about India.

As Indians, we go through many forms of farce everyday. Cops erect barricades on the road to make vehicles go in a slow zig-zag fashion as they sit chatting on the pavement on plastic chairs. What I want to know is, from where do they get the chairs? Are they officially issued? When they set out to work, do their wives pack them with the lunchbox?

When I am zig-zagging, I want to believe that the cops make me do this because they have got some deep intelligence tip-off, and that they are sitting on the pavement on their plastic chairs and gossiping only to lower the guard of terrorists.

It is not as though the private sector is more substantive. Outside every hotel and mall, that malnourished former farmer who opens the boot of your car and looks for two seconds, it is as though he has X-ray vision.

Habituated to farce all our Indian lives, we don’t protest. We inch along, join queues, submit to checks. Sometimes, I try to look suspicious to the guard outside the airport, or when I am in a car outside a hotel, as the fancy-dress guard examines the boot. I pretend to have a pistol under my shirt. But no one has bothered. If you are a more serious person than me, maybe you should launch a serious protest. Let us not forget why farce exists. It absolves an authority from doing something that is not a farce.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist and creator of the Netflix series ‘Decoupled’





The folly of trying to fix inequality


2022-01-23

But, you know, they don’t do any of that. They only curse inequality, in spurts, every time fresh data says the same old thing. As has been going on after a humanitarian outfit called Oxfam revealed more unsurprising data on ‘inequality’ in India—that India’s richest 10% had 45% of Indian wealth, while the bottom half had only 6%. Maybe such numbers make the Indian affluent feel more smug than bad. But perhaps it also angers them, in an entertaining sort of way, when they learn that the wealth of the richest 98 Indians is equal to that of the bottom 40%.

Why do beneficiaries of inequality lament inequality? Do they mean to say, “Look we cannot impoverish ourselves to make society equal, but we want the poor to become as rich as us, and get the same chances, and make life more competitive and difficult for our children”? Do you really believe this?

Can inequality be solved, or is it a natural consequence of human nature? Actually, is equality one of those thought experiments of European philosophers, like equilibrium or communism, which the world has taken too seriously? Across the ages, everywhere, among the first things that happen to an advancing society of humans is inequality.

Is social ‘inequality’ merely a complaint of the 98 percentile against the 99th percentile? Millionaires loathing multi-millionaires and multi-millionaires loathing billionaires? Leonard Cohen was a millionaire when he sang, beautifully, Everybody knows the fight was fixed; The poor stay poor, the rich get rich; That’s how it goes; Everybody knows. So are Elizabeth Warren, Arundhati Roy and many other politicians and activists who say less poetic things about inequality.

Some argue social inequality began with the invention of mass production; some argue inequality is so fundamental to human nature that it did not have to wait for the rise capitalism. The master and the servant may have slept in the same room before the Industrial Revolution, but they were still master and servant, were they not?

Even if inequality is a natural consequence of advancement, it doesn’t mean it isn’t evil. We don’t have to consecrate all that is natural.

In the past century, many modern billionaires have addressed the matter of inequality with a degree of respect. And what they have said is that the solution to inequality lies in capitalism. It is a flawed argument. An omen of this flaw is this metaphor often cited by capitalists: “A rising tide lifts all boats.” This imagery is meant to suggest that economic growth will lift all sections of society. But then a rising tide is an egalitarian force that lifts all boats equally; while economic growth, though it lifts everyone, lifts the rich much more than the rest.

Still, all things considered, the poor today may have a better standard of living than Mughal emperors. One of the richest men to have ever lived, Andrew Carnegie, while accepting that inequality is a creation of capitalism, wrote, “Much better this great irregularity than universal squalor.” But this does not reflect a correct perception of poverty. Many segments of the population may not be as deprived as before, but since the rich have more, those who are not rich feel poor. Poverty is relative. The very existence of the rich creates it.

The notion of ‘basic necessities’ for sustenance is an enduring example of nonsense. Indian policymakers may find it hard to believe, but the fact is that people don’t live to just eat starch and sugar. They want many experiences that some humans invented and other humans experience: fun and comfort, for example. Every time something improves lives, its denial to the majority becomes one of the new meanings of poverty. That is why, as long as there are the rich, there will be the poor. It is not a healthy condition for the world. From this vast grouse against the rich, articulate people create strife.

The mechanism of greed can increase the general quality of life, but can’t fix inequality because its point is inequality. Do-gooding is inefficient because it tends to attract people who are not very good at solving problems; India’s modern history offers living proof of it.

There is another way of looking at the issue of inequality. If you use money as a measure, there will never be equality because that is the nature of money. To that end, inequality is a false lament.

People in general do feel lucky about their gifts—their youth, health, family, love, beauty, strength, intellect and how gorgeous their village is. They do not live in perpetual gloom over being in the bottom 50% at all. Yet, because money is so easy to measure, many of them get conditioned to consider themselves lesser people than some.

The real failing of the world is not in its inability to create an impossible economic equality, but in its inability to persuade people to see the truth—that money is just one of the many things that matter. Intellectuals have tried, of course, through their happiness indices. But maybe others who are more likeable should try.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





How AAP could win a single state and change India


2022-01-30

There has been no progress in the state. If anything, it looks uglier, like other parts of India cursed by something called ‘development’, which means delayed road projects, a lot of holes dug with good intentions, and piers that hold nothing. Covid has made Goa poorer, too, with high-spending tourists staying away. In any case, I do not know another state government more undeserving of tourism revenue that the Goan one.

I would like AAP to win Goa, or Punjab.

I am more curious than political. If AAP gets control of a region whose statehood is not ambiguous, unlike Delhi, and if the party can take full responsibility of the state, with the police and entire bureaucracy firmly under its authority, it would be the start of a great experiment in our democracy.

AAP’s victory in Delhi demolished an old Indian hypothesis—that you cannot win an election without being corrupt. If AAP wins a proper state, we will get answers to several questions. Can a government in India be truly clean? What happens in the short term when a government is clean; can clean politicians at the top end corruption in every layer of governance below them; or is corruption the inescapable compensation for inefficiencies in the system? In effect, does the same force govern the corrupt bureaucrat and local Goan taxi-driver who fleeces because his legitimate wage is too little?

In the first place, are all types of corruption bad, or is there good corruption? In her book, China’s Gilded Age: The Paradox of Economic Boom and Vast Corruption, Yuen Yuen Ang says there are four types of corruption. Petty theft, grand theft, speed money and access money. Petty theft is the bribe extracted by minor politicians and bureaucrats. Speed money is the bribe citizens pay bureaucrats to get access to services they have the right to get free. Grand theft, in the Indian context, is the large embezzlement of public funds by powerful or refined politicians. Ang says that these three forms of corruption stall economic growth and impoverish people. But the fourth type, “access money’, is far more interesting. It refers to the massive bribes businesses pay to make things happen, or go away.

Ang says that China is a corrupt place but it has progressed as its predominant form of corruption is “access money”. Typically, in economic evolution, societies suffer the more destructive forms of corruption; then they progress to the “access money” phase. One of the things it does is create new projects very fast. It could be an airport in a small town, or a monopoly online retail store. The lure of access money has locked China’s powerful bureaucrats in a competition to promote massive and complex projects; and to kill competing forms corruption like petty theft, grand theft and speed money.

If AAP is true to its word, it will try to end all four broad types of corruption. It will find it easier to end the form of corruption that Ang says has helped China: access money. And the forms of corruption that AAP will find hardest to kill are the more lethal ones that lower the quality of Indian life and ruin businesses. But then the party has promised it would end all forms of corruption— the petty and the more sophisticated.

Also, AAP would be in a position to change one highly visible form of chaos—roads. The only thing rational on an Indian road is what has caused Indians to be so weird. Corruption and incompetence create poor and even comical road design, which encourages Indians to continue their callous ways of driving. Bad driving, like corruption, is a form of compensation. In a full-fledged state, the most visible evidence of AAP’s effect would be on its roads.

AAP is idealistic about governance, but practical in some matters. It is a modern Hindu party that will not antagonize Hindus, within reasonable limits. Also, it may not favour tourists over locals by, say, letting app-based taxis arrive. Also, I don’t get the feeling that the party has respect for the news media. It won’t waste its time trying to promote free speech and all that. It is not a naive organization anymore that tries to imitate some imagination of European liberalism and ends up in a whirlpool of chaos. So there is a lot going for the party to focus on taking on corruption.

If AAP wins and brings about more aesthetic classrooms in government schools, and cleaner and smarter public hospitals; makes life cheaper for the poor and middle class through generous subsidies, as it has done in Delhi; brings about orderly traffic, humane public transport; and it cleans up all layers of the government, the party would transform Indian politics forever, because then the older, larger and more conventional parties in other regions of India would have no choice but to transform.

If AAP takes full control of Goa or Punjab, and it is unable to end corruption, or becomes corrupt itself, or it is unable to transform the quality of roads or public transportation, we can then accept we are probably preordained to be doomed. There is peace in that. Hope is a form of unhappiness, but the certainty of doom is peace.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





Why ‘mindfulness’ and ‘zen masters’ make little sense


2022-02-06

A few days ago, when the second most famous monk in the world, Thích Nhat Hanh, died, many famous people across the world celebrated him as an evangelist of “mindfulness”, as though it really exists. They also referred to him as a “zen master”, as though they know what it means. They could not have, because no one knows what a zen master is, or what a zen master does. The title is not like a karate black belt that you attain after a set of accomplishments. ‘Zen master’ is Western nonsense born out of an important source of nonsense —unhappy Caucasians searching for the meaning of life and finding it in something that is almost never pastel, and quaint enough for it to be exotic but not so alien that it is incomprehensible. The legend of Nhat Hanh and the fame of his “mindfulness” are products of this.

In Nhat Hanh’s words, “Mindfulness is to be aware of what is going on… When you breathe in, and if you know that you are breathing in, that is called mindfulness of breathing. When you drink your tea, and if you are aware that you are drinking your tea, that is called mindfulness of drinking.” And so on.

This is not nonsense. The immersive present is even pleasurable; just that it cannot be a full-time job for anyone even in a monastery. In any case, even if we assume that some people can actually always live in the present, why is the fierce focus on a passing moment of banality so exalted? So what if you learn to focus on the moment? Why is this spiritual or philosophical or superior to being lost in thought, being in the trance of a majestic idea, mulling our histories, or getting excited about the future? Intellectually, some of the most joyous things we do are never a marination in the present. Introspection, for instance, is entirely about the past. And an observation is not the act of seeing, as people claim; it is always the memory of seeing.

There is a perception that everything monks in maroon robes do is wise, deep and peaceful, and everything that others do frivolous and leads to anxiety. In fact, I think monks are probably deeply unhappy people; they are fleeing some deep sorrow, or their mental states might be more brooding than joyous. I do not think seekers like Nhat Hanh know more than us—what we are, why we exist, and why there is something instead of nothing. Everyone, including monks, are groping around in primordial darkness.

Once, we had nothing to do and we studied every moment, like animals, and it was boring. Modern life is the result of a deliberate and desperate attempt of humans to escape the tedium of “mindfulness”. We were reminded of this very recently when we were locked down in the pandemic. We were stuck in a long present, without any movement towards an illusory future. We fled it, inventing purpose and risking our lives.

Just because the joy of purpose is not permanent, we have allowed some men in distinctive dresses to convince us that going back to a time when all of life was monastic will lead us to happiness. The fact is that the monastic pursuit of joy is as fleeting as the more material pursuits. This is why our rural cousins who live amid breathtaking beauty want us to find them big-city jobs, even if some Indian cities are perhaps the ugliest places on earth. They have had enough being mindful of walking, of waking, of milking cattle. They want pace and fun.

The existence of false paths to happiness and joy has damaged the lives of millions of unhappy people who may have been better served if they were not given false promises.

You may have heard of Nhat Hanh only after he died, but he was far more influential than you realize. If you have heard of “living in the present”, it has come to you largely because of Nhat Hanh, through a complex route: He was born in a socially-influential family in Vietnam; for reasons that are unclear, he decided to become a monk; he was a political guy, and he soon antagonized older men; but as he had a social headstart, he could use opportunities to go West, where people saw in his ideas whatever they wished to see, as they did with Aung San Suu Kyi’s. But then when she opted to be practical, she did not live up to the Western ideal. Nhat Hanh did.

The problem with powerful people, even famous monks, is that they can be dangerous. In the early 1960s, some Buddhist monks immolated themselves as a part of what they claimed or thought was political protest. Decades later, in a conversation with Oprah Winfrey, Nhat Hanh said, “It was not suicide because in a difficult situation like in Vietnam, to make your voice heard is difficult. So sometimes we had to burn ourselves alive in order for our voice to be heard around…That is an act of love and not of despair.”

How often we have seen this. Some people who need to be rescued from depression kill themselves, and the articulate then explain a “cause” that somehow aligns with their own political motives.

What if the truth is that the suicidal only fabricate grand reasons for their final act? Those who gain from their death then make them into heroes; and this heroism in turn attracts other suicidal people to imitate not only the act of suicide, but also the method. It is probably not a coincidence that in the past 13 years, over a hundred Tibetan monks, too, chose the same method of political protest—they immolated themselves.

When Thích Nhat Hanh was justifying the suicides of monks to Winfrey, I wondered if he was being in the present. Or if he was mindful enough to ask himself why some monks burn themselves for a cause, while some live on till 95.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





What Wordle reveals about how we transmit messages


2022-02-13

You may have heard of Wordle, and many people have wondered why. They have explained why the simple puzzle has gained fame across the world. I think they are mostly wrong.

Among the theories that explain its success is that it is simple. But then, many successful games are in fact complex, and many puzzles that are not as successful are simple. Some say Wordle succeeded because it is free, or that it has a pleasing design. One American magazine argued the secret of Wordle is that “it is unoriginal”. But then there are so many word games that are free, fun and unoriginal.

Some people have wondered whether the game’s origin story had something to do with its success—its creator Josh Wardle had said that he devised it for his girlfriend. But then everything on earth has a backstory, and it is never the backstory that creates fame; rather it is the fame of an event that makes the backstory cuter than it really is.

Wardle himself has a theory for the wild success of his puzzle—it doesn’t try hard to become addictive; it doesn’t try to take your time, money or sell your attention to advertisers; and that is why the game caught on. I think Wardle, too, is wrong.

More persuasive is the theory that the puzzle’s success is in the fact that its solution can be shared on social media, in an encrypted form. But then what is not shared today on social media? And most things that are shared don’t become viral. A phenomenon requires an intrinsic quality to travel far.

So what is the answer to the puzzle of the puzzle? You may think I am behaving like Wordle on some days, having deemed your top six guesses wrong.

The clue lies in the nature of the people who share Wordle scores everyday. Their motivation to share is the key. In my observation, most of them are not habitual puzzle solvers. Wordle was easy enough for them to solve, and their amateurish excitement in sharing and talking about a puzzle for the first time in their lives is why it became a rage. The glee of a beginner has extraordinary transmission capabilities.

Wordle has introduced two more kinds of people to the world—those who share their Wordle scores and those who mock them for sharing. People who mock remind me of a type. After a plane lands, most people rise the moment it’s okay to do so, to stretch or fuss over their overhead luggage, but some keep sitting and often have smug expressions as though they are more evolved. But the overt public mockers are also amateurs. They are not new to mocking, but new to puzzles and how people react to them. Their sneers have also contributed to the transmission of Wordle.

In all this talk around the game, there is a significant third category of people—those who quietly solve the puzzle and don’t show their results or talk about it. They are invisible. This is the core group of puzzle solvers, and they have always solved more joyous and complex games like the crossword or sudoku. I don’t think serious solvers of the cryptic crossword would ever talk about Wordle, even if they solve it every day. These old-hands, the pros, almost never talk about puzzles. When they do, they speak without wonder or emotion. The reason behind this is the same as why those who are least likely to talk about the joys of drinking are serious alcoholics.

The deeper you are in something, the less you talk about it. It is not a superior or inferior way to be, but just a way of the world. This is at the heart of public articulation, and the human transmission of messages and signals. Did you know there are people who read books and never talk about them?

I have a theory to explain why many substantive books do not become popular, though this is not the only reason why they are doomed. Great books are meant for highly seasoned readers and these are people who do not speak about books long enough, simply enough or in an endearing overexcited way. A person who is accustomed to scholarly works of anthropology and who enjoys the works of, say, David Graeber, will speak very little about them compared to a person who has enjoyed Sapiens by Yuval Noah Harari. Most fans of Sapiens have never read anthropology before; Jared Diamond’s Guns, Germs and Steel, perhaps. So, what they are enthralled by is not the book as much as facile anthropology. Uncorrupted by too much reading to spot the extent of speculative fiction in those pages, they find joy. And their excitement is infectious.

Amateur writers too talk in a more excited manner about the craft of writing than professional or acclaimed writers. All my 20s, I was amused by a phenomenon—you hear a guy say very complex things about books, and then when you read his copy, you wonder where all the analysis went. Many years ago, filmmaker Ramgopal Varma described those who talk about movies in a knowledgeable way but never make anything, or anything beyond short films on social issues, as “Barista directors”. Because they would rather talk about films in cafes than endure the hard labour and many humiliations of filmmaking.

But in the transmission of the idea of what a novel is, what a film is, what art is—it is the part-time practitioner’s exotic ideas that have endured.

The whole world is talking all the time and those who are the most persuasive, relentless and loudest are amateurs. People who are mean talk a lot about empathy; people who pollute attend conferences on climate change; people who are new to investing talk a lot about cryptos and options; and megalomaniacs who are new to melancholy can never stop talking about “depression”.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





Why the ‘Himalayan yogi’ may not be fiction


2022-02-20

If you read Mint, you’d certainly know that Chitra Ramkrishna, former chief executive officer of the National Stock Exchange (NSE), appeared to be taking instructions from a man she considered a spiritual being, a “Siddha Purusha”, as she told a regulatory body when it asked who he was. He was a “paramahansa, who may be largely dwelling in the Himalayan Ranges”, one of those spirits whose “spiritual powers do not require them to have any such physical coordinates”. But he did have an email address through which he communicated with her and she passed on information that was out of bounds for a person outside the NSE, even if he were out of this world.

The yogi appeared to have instructed her to make a key appointment in 2013—Anand Subramanian, whom no one in the NSE had heard of before, as chief strategic advisor. He was paid about ten times more than his previous salary, which later increased three-folds to over ₹4 crore. In Subramanian, Ramkrishna reportedly said in one of her emails, she saw the human form of the Himalayan yogi. Nevertheless, the guru said Subramanian would “surrender” his pay to the guru. The emails between the spiritual being and the former NSE chief are over six years old. They have been revealed only now by the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Sebi), which was conducting a probe.

Many people don’t buy the story of Ramkrishna enthralled by a Himalayan yogi. They don’t buy it even though Indians have heard versions of such stories all their lives. Some say the story is a cover, alleging that Ramkrishna was in cahoots with this person. In one of the emails, the yogi said, “Today you are looking awesome. You must learn different ways to [plait] your hair which will make your looks interesting and appealing.” Some suspect Subramanian was the yogi. The Sebi report offers this hypothesis, but disputes it on the basis of emails that suggest otherwise.

There is a reason why many Indians want to believe this story is more about fraud than spirituality. Ramkrishna, at the height of her power, was seen as an icon of modern India, an accomplished woman who led one of the largest stock exchanges in the world. Even after she resigned in disgrace in 2016, facing accusations of favouring some brokers, her stature was not so diminished. But Sebi’s revelations that she could have been controlled by a man who claimed to be a spiritual being is the kind of thing that embarrasses Indians.

Purely going by precedence, I would posit that Chitra Ramkrishna and her guru were not co-conspirators. She may really have believed in the divine powers of this mysterious guru, and the guru himself may not have been a complete con. A part of him, or all of him, may have thought he is a supernatural being. A con-man is not likely to have this kind of power over a person; a deluded person can. At the heart of human influence is the principle: to fool others, you must first fool yourself.

If Ramkrishna had fabricated the ‘Himalayan yogi’ as a cover to swindle, how could she expect a supernatural being with internet access to help her get off the hook if it went wrong? It does not make sense. Indian law may recognize deities as legal people, but I don’t think anyone has gotten away by claiming “a siddha purusha asked me to do it”. Also, Sebi’s allegation that Subramanian’s appointment was “a money-making scheme” sounds odd. It would be a clumsy and low-stakes swindle for the CEO of a stock exchange to be involved in the salary heist of a single underling, given how lucrative a fraud involving, say, a split-second stock-data advantage for traders, could be.

I do not entirely dismiss a financial angle. Also, I do accept that the ‘Himalayan’ part of the ‘Himalayan yogi’ is not very convincing. The reputation of this mountain range as a source of ancient sages is indisputable, but whose guru is from the Himalayas anymore? That one’s guru lives in the Himalayas is something a person with no guru is likely to say. Even so, I find it very easy to believe that a person can be made to behave in strange ways by a spiritual guru.

Shared psychosis is fairly common. In this form of psychosis, a severely deluded person can transfer the delusion to a person who is sane and has the psychological predisposition to come under the influence of the insane. People who spend a long time in an environment where the supernatural experience assumes prophetic overtones have been observed to undergo such transformations when nudged by someone with deep conviction. It is like the click of “everything” falling in place. We think that just because there is a ‘click’, it has to be something true, deep and right. But a convenient lie falling in place probably has the same satisfying sound.

In 2018, in a Delhi suburb, a man followed the instructions of his dead father, and influenced at least nine of his family, all known to be sane and normal people, to stand on stools in a circle along with him, with nooses around their necks, and hang themselves. In this world, it is hard to get people to subscribe to good newspapers or get vaccinated, but one man can get nine sane people to voluntarily hang themselves.

Influence is a strange thing. A delusion is infectious, while truth simply does not travel.

By those standards, Ramkrishna’s submission to a spiritual being, as one version of the NSE’s remote management story has it, would not have been extraordinary. Many American CEOs have or have had gurus. Apple’s co-founder Steve Jobs may once have been under the spell of an Indian mystic too. If their communication when the relationship was at its peak were to be revealed today, it may seem bizarre.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





Whom to trust while reading about Russia’s war


2022-02-27

How must we read when we do not know much about what we wish to read? How can we find an approximation of the truth, which is always complex and grey, in an ocean of humane opinions, and opinions that are not called opinions, and that form of propaganda known as “the moral compass”. If we want to know why Russia’s Vladimir Putin invaded Ukraine, or whether the reasons matter at all, what must we do? Were the street protestors in Moscow merely Russian asparagus-eaters whose fathers support Putin’s action? Does Putin have the support of most ordinary Russians, and does that change anything?

Everyone around me in India appears to hate Putin, and that is explained by a combination of three factors: they wish to be good people; they have no stake in this war; and they have good internet access. Also, like me, they don’t know anything about the complexity of Russia-Ukraine relations, despite their education in the past week. Stuff that you get to know only if you experience those places. Without experience, people tend to fall for whatever sounds moral.

I have never received a single piece of news favouring Russia, but I have got thousands warning me of “Russian disinformation”. Russian propaganda is state-run, clumsy and works best locally. Western propaganda is autonomous, sophisticated and has global reach. My life is filled with the Western moral slant. Take this headline of The Guardian, “Decision to invade Ukraine raises questions over Putin’s ‘sense of reality’“, which wants me to think Putin has gone crazy. Or take this in a “news analysis” of The New York Times (NYT): “The 20-foot-long table that Mr Putin has used to socially distance himself this month from European leaders flying in for crisis talks symbolizes, to some longtime observers, his detachment from the rest of the world.” I marvel at the suggestion that more than one “longtime” observer arrived at the same metaphor to convey the same—that Putin is aloof.

I think a new form of illiteracy has come about. People can read, but not between the lines. They cannot identify bias, ideology, hyper-morality and inaccuracies in easy labels like ‘fascist’ and ‘dictator’ and ‘neo-Nazi’. To read 5,000 words and miss the subtext or slant is a kind of illiteracy.

So, how to read about this war if we don’t know enough? I feel it is futile to search for a ‘neutral’ report because human beings are not neutral. Maybe we must go straight to the source. Historians will say that the source is always history, but historians tend to overrate history. The relevant source of an event is usually something recent. In understanding Ukraine’s invasion, Putin’s recent speeches are not inconsequential. He laid out the West as a mere idea, its promotion of its own values as evangelism, and portrayed the North Atlantic Treaty Organization as the military arm of a hypocritical cultural fellowship. He said he did not want West European culture to infect his neighbourhood as he felt it could infect Russia. To ensure this, he wished to subdue Ukraine, which had drifted towards the West.

That speech was meant for the world, but he could not have risked appearing farcical to fellow Russians. Also, Putin did not say anything new. That was his point. That he is tired of drawing the West’s attention to their cultural invasion. Some Western intellectuals do say that the West is not without blame, as they gave Ukraine unreal hopes and false machismo. Take this view of a former finance minister of Greece, Yanis Varoufakis: “The only issue today should be to stop the war and to secure the withdrawal of Russian troops from Ukraine. The only way that could happen is a Washington-Moscow agreement that Russia withdraws in exchange for a commitment of Ukrainian neutrality. Anything else is war mongering.” This is a common view among those who know the region. Yet, many Indians have bought the idea that Putin’s reasons for the invasion were a mystery and that he is some kind of James Bond film villain.

When we read about turmoil that we don’t understand, we are often nudged by writers into a moral position. As a result, most Indians who rate themselves as informed have a uniform set of views about issues that do not affect them directly: so Putin is seen as evil; Israel too; and also Mahinda Rajapaksa in how he put an end to Tamil militancy in Sri Lanka. But these men are viewed very differently by their own people. Just the way a large swathe of Indians perceive Prime Minister Narendra Modi differently from how, say, the foreign subscribers of NYT probably do.

Indians who condemn Russia are likely to hold a different view of India’s 2019 integration of Kashmir. Assume that New Delhi had yielded to Western pressure decades ago, let a plebiscite be held in Kashmir, and it decided to become a sovereign Islamic republic that began to drift towards Pakistan; India would not have let that happen, perhaps by force, regardless of what the Western media said. But Putin’s invasion is berated in India.

A few days ago, Subramanian Swamy of the Bharatiya Janata Party tweeted, “The Russian senseless bombing of Ukraine’s soft targets is a detestable act of utter cruelty.” Such views often emerge from the quota of moral grandstanding that everyone needs to fulfil, and fulfilling it is easier to do on issues that are distant and have very low domestic stakes.

Regional strongmen might be more complex and saner than what lazy words like “despot” and “dictator” depict. When we read without self-righteousness, we see that very little of what people do is irrational, and that somehow makes the world less scary.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





The dubious value of winning battles on social media


2022-03-06

When two nations are in a conflict, the region from where poignant photographs emerge is usually the country that is hiding something better than the other one. It seeks to be morally overvalued by the rest of the world. This overvaluation is known as “winning the social media war”. Palestine and Kashmir, for instance, have always been winners of such a war. And more recently, we are told by jubilant people who lead their lives by a “moral compass” that Ukraine is winning the “propaganda war”. But does it matter? Is there any substantive value in winning a social-media war?

Since the invasion of Ukraine by Russia, most of us have been flooded with heartbreaking images from Ukraine. In every war, there is always that little girl who is holding a toy, crying her goodbye to her handsome dad, who is in uniform, kneeling. Many of the stories are real and stirring. But some have turned out to be fake. For instance, a popular video clip of a Russian warship asking Ukrainian soldiers on Snake Island to surrender, with one Ukrainian defying the order through an expletive. We were told the Russians then blew up the island, killing all on it. It was endorsed by Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelensky. Ukraine even named the ‘deceased soldiers’, and announced posthumous awards, but it emerges that all those soldiers had surrendered and are alive.

In other spurious news that Ukraine or its handlers have successfully transmitted, ingenious Ukrainians have hacked into the phones of advancing Russian soldiers and are hearing “everything”. And of course, there have been moving images of Ukrainian civilian women taking up arms to defend their nation. And even of a male journalist claiming that he will stay put in a city under siege and defend it, making me feel sheepish because if Russians ever invade Gurgaon, I may be tempted to tell them exactly what to bomb. Even as stories of valour came in, the million-odd Ukrainians who fled were not shamed as cowards, but respected, correctly, as victims.

The world is awash in the perception that Ukrainians are good, funny and intelligent people, ruined by a mad Russian. Zelensky himself has become a mythical figure across the world for his defiance and willingness to become a martyr. Even a video clip in which he plays the piano with a body part that is not meant for playing the piano has becoming endearing, which it is.

It is hard to dispute that Ukraine is “winning the battle of hearts”, but then it is usually won by those who lose the actual war. So, does winning the social-media war have any value, or is it just a feeble blow delivered by the vanquished? What has all this new global love for Ukraine got it except more encouragement to prolong its destruction?

Exaggeration and hyperbole are not entirely useless. They do defend the weak against the strong. They travel faster than dull facts, they are infectious as news, and they get the world’s attention and thereby serve as a shield for the oppressed or handlers of the oppressed. This is the foundation of activism itself, but for it to work, it needs the villain, like a politician, government or corporation, to have shame at least for tactical reasons, and hence be afraid of sustained defamation. But outside this framework, where the interest of the strong is greater than their need for compliments, the social-media war is largely useless.

I am certain public opinion matters to Russia’s Vladimir Putin. But, even though he has moved to block Facebook in Russia, like many strongmen, he probably knows that social media often represents the public opinion of a public that does not matter.

There are many ideas that win the social-media battle but lose the war. The liberal campaign against Brexit, for example, and in India, the campaign against Aadhaar in the name of privacy. Hundreds of millions of Indians are lucky that the hyper-moral lost that battle. There are, of course, ideas that were popular on social media that eventually won in the physical world. Like the campaign of middle-class farmers against farm reform, but its social-media noise had nothing much to do with the victory of the movement, which drew public support in a few states through conventional ways of creating fear and by recruiting thousands of farm labourers to demonstrate on the streets for months.

Social media is not an equal place. Some news does better than the rest. The ideas that usually win are simple, moral and negative stories delivered to victims or bystanders who have no stake in the matter. Ukraine is perfectly poised to win, even as it faces destruction in the real world.

Russia has tried to counter Ukraine’s popularity with its own propaganda, but it was doomed because social media is a bad conductor of the views of the morally grey. On Thursday, just as I was getting alarmed that I am surrounded only by good people who transmit only Ukrainian or Western propaganda, I finally got a bit of Russia’s infamous “disinformation”. Scott Ritter, the former United Nations weapons inspector in Iraq who had become the moral face of America’s war in Iraq and whom The New York Times had described as “the loudest and most credible skeptic of the Bush administration’s contention that Hussein was hiding weapons of mass destruction”, gave an interview that was posted on YouTube in which he said Nato was “too weak” to stop Russia, and that Ukraine’s government, though led by a Jew, was run by a “neo-Nazis”.

Ukraine was quick to denounce him as a Russian agent. I got that news instantly. Too many good people around me.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





What may happen in a state where no one takes bribes


2022-03-13

It is as though our bodies cannot endure astonishment; that is why when a marvellous event occurs, we forget how improbable it once was. Until a few years ago, many of us believed that only a corrupt person from a corrupt party can win an election. Even the anti-corruption movement was not about creating upright politicians, but a lament that they do not exist, cannot exist, and for that reason elected politicians must be supervised by unelectable activists who won the Magsaysay Award. That movement was in fact not an anti-corruption movement but a continuation of an anti-politician movement which began in Mumbai after the terror attacks of November 2008. But then, one of its leading revolutionaries, Arvind Kejriwal, realized the only meaningful revolution in a democracy was democracy itself. He would form a party to contest elections in a clean way.

His Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) would win a series of elections, forming governments in Delhi, and now in Punjab. But its government in Delhi was and is nominal, because of the special status of the quasi-state. The Centre has demonstrated that through the medium of its lieutenant governor, it can stifle almost all efforts of Delhi’s government to govern. The Delhi administration is a puppet controlled by a puppet. Thus AAP in Delhi could never answer the great Indian question: What happens when politicians of a ruling party in a state do not accept bribes? Maybe now we can find out—in Punjab.

With 92 seats in Punjab’s 117-seat assembly, AAP has significant freedom to do what it wants. So what is going to happen?

You may think I am naive in believing that AAP is not corrupt. You may point out that some of the party’s elected members even have criminal cases against them. But there is really no evidence to suggest that AAP has organized corruption as part of its business model like many other parties. And the few times its members have faced charges of pelf, the party has acted swiftly against them in a way that is unusual for any Indian political party. As for the criminal cases faced by some of its members, they are mild, unproven and appear to be politically driven. Also, this greyness of AAP, which enables it to woo popular characters who it believes are clean even if they face accusations, is a hint that the party is now more formidable than people think.

Idealists are mostly useless. They do not get that idealism is a thought experiment meant to clarify the human condition; it is not to be taken seriously. Addicted to the clarity of a thought experiment, they are lost in the real world. The success of AAP is its focus on only one virtue—financial propriety. On this, the party is neither grey nor pragmatic. In everything else, it makes compromises. It appeases caste groups, tries hard not to upset Hindus, and may not go after stubble-burning farmers who contribute to Delhi’s poisonous air.

Most humans have the same set of virtues; what separates us is the order in which we hold ideals. It is the same with political parties. In being uncompromising on financial corruption and deeming it a greater evil than all else, AAP has put itself in a position to solve the simplest form of evil.

Like how hunger is the greatest consequence of abject poverty, yet the easiest to solve as a person progresses, corruption is a great destructive consequence of modern India’s disastrous experiments but easier to solve compared to more complex evils like class and identity.

So, what happens when a party that says none of its members will take bribes or permit any form of financial corruption has complete control over a state. What are we going to witness? With near-full freedom to rule Punjab, what exactly will AAP do? What can clean politics achieve in the state ?

In my fantasy Punjab of the future, this is what will occur: With the top brass of the state government not asking government officials to funnel a cut of all bribes to it, it can confidently go to war against corruption at all rungs of the police and bureaucracy. It may even ask people to secretly record government officials asking for bribes.

Without a higher authority sabotaging it, and with government officials forced to be honest, the quality of public services like roads and road design, mass transit systems, hospitals and schools will improve perceptibly. It will also lead to a greater ease in doing business. Even an AAP suffocated by the central government in Delhi could achieve reasonably good state-run schools and hospitals and find the money to distribute cheap or free water and electricity to lower-middle-class homes and the poor.

As you can see, in my fantasy Punjab, there will be a lot of things going on. But will they be visible? Five years from now, would Punjab look as though it is more advanced than the rest of India? Kejriwal’s AAP does not appear to be enamoured by urban aesthetics or the grandness of infrastructure. It would not want to build a Dubai, nor will it be strict enough to enforce road discipline. Still, many of the transformations can be conspicuous.

A major flaw of India is that it treats the average citizen as a poor person, so offers everyone poor utilities. Even today, many politicians and bureaucrats think air-conditioning is a luxury. But AAP has demonstrated that it treats the average citizen as a middle-class person, like Kejriwal. This can create good public services, like aesthetic and comfortable buses and trains, and free hospitals that look fancy to the average Indian.

A clean government is more conspicuous than people think, and the failure of AAP, too, should it fail, will be more glaring than more complex political failures.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





The other Gandhis who may need to give up leadership


2022-03-21

Every now and then there are elections, the Indian National Congress fares poorly, and all sorts of people then call for liberating the party from the Gandhi household. The party’s top rung has a series of dinners in Delhi. People can’t talk, it seems, without eating. Unattributed news would leak that the Gandhis are willing to step aside, but then the most powerful members of the party would plead with the family not to quit, and the family would gracefully agree to stay on formally and in other ways.

This has been the recent history of the Congress and the chain of events was repeated again a few days ago. But with every electoral defeat, calls for its liberation from the Gandhis have grown bolder and louder within the party and its long tail of intellectuals, activists, media observers and other politicians who are not called politicians. Even people who don’t vote Congress call for the resignation of the Gandhis—just for a lark, like how Indians honk without knowing why. Asking the Gandhis to resign is an Indian subculture.

There are Gandhis in other spheres of Indian life, people whose surname is not Gandhi but were born into privilege, into luck, and who are classy in an old-world way. They can be found today in academia, responsible journalism, activism, policy circles, think tanks, environmentalism, something called civil society, art, culture and the subjective humanities establishment. This is the long tail of the Congress party, the fellowships of those who used to feed off its power.

They had two informal political jobs: to promote the party, and to promote its values. As we can see, the long-tail, too, has failed. The metaphorical Gandhis of the long tail who control, run or occupy the liberal Congress ecology have not been able to stop the emergence of a new India that is the exact opposite of what they hoped to achieve. But they are more distraught by the failure of the original Gandhis in elections. And they now say aloud what they never had the courage to say in open, that “the Gandhis should go”. But what about them ? Shouldn’t they, too, face the consequences of failure, and make way for more talented evangelists of their gospel?

To understand the scale of what our metaphorical Gandhis control, let us first look at what the Congress party stands for. To understand anyone fully, we must consider their best side, not their worst. So do not let the party’s reality interfere with the marvel of their first principles. The party is an umbrella for various pressure groups and regional grouses. As a result, it stands for a broad and unique set of absolute virtues that no other political party in India can easily adopt without antagonizing a sizeable voter base. Generally in modern India, if you feel you are prospering or you feel you have some cultural swag, you lean towards the Bharatiya Janata Party, but if you feel unlucky, depressed, bereft of job prospects, poorer than before, culturally insecure and seek political compassion, you are in the Congress frame of mind. Thus there is a significant moral reason for the party to exist and also an obligation to achieve power.

The metaphorical Gandhis are in the same moral space, which is why it is not surprising that they directly and indirectly campaign for the Congress. A decade ago, when the party ran India, its national advisory council that “advised” the prime minister was made up of social activists and intellectuals, most of whom, in terms of class and luck, were long-tail Gandhis. They failed in their evangelism as badly as the Gandhi household and the Congress party.

Liberal ideals of Western extraction, which once had many prophets in the Congress long-tail, are faceless today in India. The ideals themselves have faded away. Since my childhood, I have seen people describe themselves as socialists, communists, human rights activists, anarchists, environmentalists and other things. What exactly have they achieved? The same people are now fighting the same battles on behalf of the same kind of people, who are in fact worse off if you take into account how far ahead the middle classes and rich have moved. So what did all that activism achieve? What did all their angry essays achieve?

I do not say that the Congress long-tail has been useless. I am sure they have somehow made some lives better, brought justice to some and influenced useful policy. But this is like saying the original Gandhis, too, have not been a washout. The Congress does win some seats here and there, and even form a government here and there. I say this is not enough.

Our most important idea is that the lucky should take care of the unlucky, and this idea in India is managed by those who are not smart enough to succeed and will not make way for the more talented to take over.

Historically, human progress has been triggered by three forces: when greed drives the economy, when a society’s second rung revolts against the elite in the masquerade of activism, and when people do compassionate things because human misery breaks their hearts. From what I see around me, most of India’s progress is because of market forces and the enchantment of greed—of entrepreneurs looking to prosper and politicians with the same goal. The humanitarian movements controlled by old money have done very little. This has been India’s real disaster. Organized compassion and direct action need exceptionally smart people. Our crisis is that we have no mechanism to filter incompetence out of humanitarian efforts. Maybe one great humane act they can do is sacking themselves so that smarter people can take charge. They need to do to themselves what they ask the Gandhis to do. Get out of the way.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





What’s the ‘West’ and why does it praise others so often?


2022-03-28

We were reminded this year that ‘the West’ is not ‘White people’. Russia, for instance, is not the West, according to the West and also Russia. Some people say Japan is a part of the West. But that is because they think if a country is rich, and has stand-up comedians and fair elections, it must be ‘the West’. But is it possible to spot ‘the West’ on a map? I don’t think all of the US will make it. Maybe the West is not a region. It is not even most people in Europe and North America. But the West does exist. Some scholars say the West is an idea. Scholars who say something is an idea usually mean it is a good idea. The West probably is, but if so, it is a good idea that thinks there is no other good idea, which makes it something sacred, like a religion. But then the West has been a sacred idea for so long, its modern description has to be more than that.

I think the West is a set of behaviours. For instance, it talks a lot. It is always engaged in articulation, especially about things you may not have thought possible to talk about. The West is big on compliments. It appreciates other people when they do something agreeable or fascinating, or when they fall in line. It has awards, tributes, odes, panegyrics, epitaphs and other forms of appreciation.

You may think all this is human nature, but the uniqueness of the Western way is in the degree. Before the West’s influence, other cultures did not invest so much effort and resources in articulation and paying public tributes. Even now they don’t. We Indians are rarely effusive in praising others in a foreign land, for there is something immodest about that. But I know people from the West who land in a foreign country and take little time to start singing praises to its artists, even declaring some of them “national treasures” when they already are national treasures. This may seem trivial but is in actuality a visible side of the powerful technique of subjective acclaim, a method of persuasion.

The West is also big on self-loathing and self-whipping, which too are ways of talking. But one of the most important aspects of the West is that its political impulse is Christian, especially of its atheists and rationalists.

The substantive part of Christianity is not anymore its fables and magic-realism, but its ancient obsession with the transmission of a moral idea. This, too, is about talking.

No other faith wishes to convince you of how right it is than Christianity through sermons and open debates. Ancient Brahmins, on the other hand, worked very hard to keep everything secret. It is possible that even the bit of articulation other faiths began doing was in response to the spread of Christianity, which believes there is only one right path, and everyone has to be persuaded to see it that way. On this medium of communication, the Christian restlessness to transmit a moral idea travel almost all major ideas that define the West —democracy, individual liberty, equality, environmentalism and so on. There is only one way to live, govern, and be right, and that is the way of the West. Everything else is evil, unless it is esoteric like innocuous cultural festivals, colourful saris and ‘mindfulness’. The origin of the European Enlightenment was in Christian monks learning obscure languages so that they could argue with people of other lands and show them why the Christian way was superior. The arguments brought philosophical ideas to Europe, in which elites marinated for decades, talking, talking, talking.

You will never hear of China or Russia seriously try to persuade you to adopt their political ways. They may praise themselves, run a clumsy propaganda wing, exaggerate their past, but they do not spend time on proper evangelism. But the West never tires of asking people to be like it. That is why it keeps talking about ideas that are more abstract than they seem, like equality and rights; and celebrates those who fall in line through prizes like the Nobel. And it condemns people who defy the Western way as despots and oligarchs, who are somehow different from its presidents and billionaires.

Nelson Mandela, even though he was wooed with Western praise, was too smart to fall for those charms. Once, when an American journalist asked him why he was friendly with people like Fidel Castro, Yasser Arafat and Muammar Gaddafi whom the West condemned, Mandela’s answer was, “One of the mistakes which some political analysts make is to think their enemies should be our enemies.” This observation arrives at the very reason why the West is so sanctimonious. It praises nations, too, in self-interest. Ukraine’s current misery and miscalculations are partly traceable to Western compliments—first for its “democracy” and other Western appearances, and now as it gets wrecked, for its “courage”.

The West is smug because it believes that it has reformed the world. And it has transmitted this hypothesis the best: that without the West and its invention of organized compassion, the world would have been filled with savages, alpha men would have run amok, women would have no joy, widows would have been burnt and the unlucky would have been abandoned. But the records of olden-day Western intellectuals point to something else—that mostly everything the West claims was its invention was taken from other civilizations that flourished long before its rise. Also, there is no evidence that customs like ‘sati’ in India were widely prevalent. One of the most absurd triumphs of Western historians is to have convinced some of us that Indians had no qualms burning girls alive until they were reformed by some nice guys. All of reformation itself must be a sham; it lets some people take too much credit for the inherent banal goodness in most people.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





Can American billionaires really find a cure for ageing?


2022-04-03

Is ageing a disease or technology? Growing old, one way or another, is decay over time, but is it a glitch that nature was indifferent to; or is it a spectacular idea to get rid of the old so that the new can thrive, an idea that has endured over other ideas? In the end, what does nature want—immortal life or never-ending change? We know what most humans want and it is to not age. Not our fault; old people have been bad ambassadors of old age. If ageing is a disease, it must be cured. If ageing is a technology of nature, it has to be made obsolete; in that case, humans have to hack nature itself.

Respectable scientific opinion says that ageing is a disease. This does not deny it the sacred status of being ‘natural’; cancer, too, is ‘natural’. All diseases are.

Like us, American billionaires, who are enjoying life immensely, do not wish to age. But unlike many of us, they have the burden of being in a position to do something about it. Several of them have invested in bio-tech firms to find ways to cure ageing. The latest to join them is one of the richest people on earth, Jeff Bezos, who has made a substantive investment in a new firm called Altos Labs, which is believed to have a commitment of $3 billion from its wealthy backers.

It is all auspicious. The self-interest and greed of entrepreneurs have benefitted all of humanity more than the complex pursuit of the public good. And, for the first time in the history of human greed, we have a situation where the motive of wealthy entrepreneurs is not profit, but something more valuable— their lives. And to achieve the cure, these biotech firms are a rare mixture of romantic pure science and hard-nosed practicality. The billionaires who are funding them emerge from a culture that assures them that well-financed human genius can solve anything. Indian billionaires, on the other hand, probably like to visit temples to solve the same problem.

I am on the side of American billionaires but there are some omens I cannot ignore. Medical sciences have been a big disappointment over the past three decades or so. They have become good at prolonging death, not prolonging life. If you are not dying, if you are healthy and fit, they offer little. Yes, there have been vaccines, the accident of Viagra and excellent pain-killers. And, you may argue that high levels of health and fitness in some people is a consequence of high-quality scientific information available to us. Even so, from the point of view of the young and healthy, the field has made only modest progress. Forget breakthrough technologies for those who are not dying, there is confusion over basic concepts except for the evil of sugar, which is settled. Is bad cholesterol really bad? Should you have fish oil? Do vitamins help? Should we have more minerals to balance the excess purity of our water? Is a keto diet wise? Is intermittent fasting beneficial? No one is sure. Why should we believe a ‘cure’ will be found for ageing?

Spanish scientist Juan Carlos Izpisua, one of the marquee hires of Altos, told the newspaper El País, “I am convinced that within two decades we will have tools that not only treat symptoms, but also can predict, prevent and treat diseases and ageing through cellular rejuvenation.” As a lifelong reader of popular-science news, I know that when someone says something will occur in “20 years”, it is not based on an analysis of facts, but a way of saying, “We have nothing to show now but we’re hopeful.”

Until a few years ago, there was much talk around telomeres, structures that form the tips of some chromosomes. Ageing shortens telomeres, which influences the degeneration of a cell. Scientists and I had fervent hopes that this held the key to a cure. But the buzz around telomeres has died.

American tech billionaires believe that their billions will attract the brightest scientific talent to find a cure. But do only the bright make breakthroughs?

What does the history of innovation suggest, even in computer science?

It all begins in banal ways. A particular stream of human endeavour appears to acquire bright prospects and a whole generation of bright and dim people flock to it. From this, accidents occur and a breakthrough is rarely what was set as “a goal”. In fact, even problems whose solutions were clear objectives set by governments, like cheap computers and linguistic transliteration, were accidentally solved by those working on far more frivolous issues.

It is possible that a cure for ageing takes a very different approach. It need not be an accident, it could be a direct solution to a clear problem. But no one disputes that a cure requires a vast number of scientists and engineers, all of whom will be sourced from a very small portion of the human population—the lucky who went to school and among them a small fraction who love science or who were forced to study science, and among them a small fraction who will resist the lure of the metaverse or artificial intelligence to pick biotech, and then the few among them who would have the capacity to endure that special quality of such endeavours: that it is mostly very boring. Meanwhile, we know that there might be a biotech genius rotting away in a slum in Mumbai never to have even known what science is.

So I wonder if the fastest way for Jeff Bezos and other billionaires to cure ageing is to take a chance and solve the problem of abject poverty among children first. If all the children in the world get a fair shot at life, surely that will increase our odds of finding that great elusive insight that could keep us young forever. This, I admit, is the least sexy solution for a scientific problem that I am aware of, which makes me even more optimistic about it.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





Why circumstances in India may get better for Muslims


2022-04-10

Things are bad for Muslims in India. It is an odd sentence because a statement about India is usually untrue if it has so few words. Where are the exceptions, caveats and context that stretch the line? But somehow, we have come to a point where seven words can describe some 200 million Muslims—the rich and the poor among them, superstars and the wretched, men, women and even the Gujarati Bohra Muslim fans of Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

Most unpleasant things that Western humanitarians, politicians and journalists say about modern India are not entirely true. For instance, the lament of American Congresswoman Ilhan Omar a few days ago, “How much does the Modi administration have to criminalize the act of being Muslim in India for us to say something?” This is nonsense. Usually, American condemnation of India is more sophisticated. It would say something we know is not the whole truth but we cannot zero in on the lie and pick it apart. It is the slant and implications that are erroneous.

Yet, is hard to dispute the growing view that Indian Muslims have it bad. They are not brutalized, as some people in the West seem to think, but the perpetual mental torment of the community is probably far worse than what they endured at the peak of the Ayodhya dispute, or when Islamist terrorism was the predominant fear of the world. All talk of “genocide” against Muslims is a hyperbole, but what is true is that everyday, there are a million small slaps. And that is worse.

While extraordinary events, like riots, did traumatize Muslims, they were brief and contained the promise of being rare. But the ongoing minor assaults that are ubiquitous may have filled India’s Muslims with the gloom of being treated as lesser people in their own country. Just a few days ago, yet another man in costume, his only qualification to claim sacred status, told a large crowd that if Muslim men harassed Hindu women, he would arrange the sexual assault of Muslim women. Young men in the audience cheered, even invoked a deity’s name. What the man in costume did was a crime; there were cops in the audience and the event was recorded. Yet, he walks around free, at least at time of writing. Everyday, there are things people say about Muslims—what they are, what they should be allowed to do and where they belong. It has all become banal. Before we came to this pass, it used to take an extraordinary incident to unsettle Muslims.

Many of us who have no idea how bad caste discrimination might have been are today presented with its dark might in plain sight. Their Muslim identity is held against them; their names are a liability; even the rich, famous and scholarly are diminished in public perception by their religious label. The most underrated right an Indian enjoys is the right to minor misdemeanours and I think Muslims in India have lost that right in many situations. They typically dare not express road rage, say, or get into other brawls.

Usually in India, an evil has a dark logical reason to exist. Caste, for example, may have begun in an ancient pandemic and then become a way of excluding vast sections from the use of limited resources. Discrimination against women too, as in other regions of the world, had beneficiaries. Sporadic pushes against Muslims were also battles for market access and real estate. But the current situation is not only evil, it offers no returns and has no beneficiaries. If anything, this is a situation that does not bode well for Hindus either. It has become easy for low-grade politicians to become popular just by saying nasty things about Muslims. Pakistanis can tell us how fast religious zealots of low intellect with a grouse against progress and modernity can grow popular and the destruction they can cause. Democracy is a dangerous medium if the wrong kind of people get quick breaks. The treatment of Muslims has also diminished the global prestige of Hindus. The world is ready to believe any hyperbolic report from India.

Most Hindus are not perpetrators of oppression, but then the nature of public evil is such that it does not require a majority to actively participate in it. Indifference to small injustices is enough.

Despite the grimness of India’s situation, I believe that things can get a lot better for Muslims. Maybe what is going on right now is a nadir that we had to pass before modern India rises towards a more intelligent way of being. I see hope in a powerful institution that is situated outside the government, the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh. Some of the recent speeches of its chief Mohan Bhagwat go beyond condemning violence against Muslims. He has said that people who commit such violence cannot be considered Hindus.

He emerges from a cultural victory—a sense that Hindus have won. What exactly they have won can never be clear, but something has been won. All European thought experiments of Indian aristocrats who wished to convert India into a confused imitation of Europe have failed. An ancient society will have some biases; better those biases than flaky ideals like secularism.

Unthreatened by Islam, modern Hindus will develop the magnanimity to see the point of what Mohan Bhagwat said: “[The] Hindu Rashtra is not a Hindu-only nation.” Also, top politicians will see that allowing facile hate-mongering is creating new political rivals, so it is best to enforce hate-speech laws. Also, the apparent loss of the social stature of Indian Muslims may help them command more compassion than envy. And a period of peace could show the majority that banal irritations at anything Islamic are not intuitive responses to any danger, but merely a fear of the unfamiliar.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





Why people are better than their opinions may suggest


2022-04-17

Someone says Will Smith should not have hit Chris Rock. A woman disagrees; she says there are consequences for laughing at a woman’s disease. Her husband, who on other days thinks free speech is nonsense, says a bad joke has a fundamental right to exist. The wife, who does not actually think any man punches another man for the greater good of women, says that Smith single-handedly started “a conversation” about alopecia. The husband believes a bad joke is important because it is from bad jokes that good jokes arise. Then, his wife says, you will be punched in the face by decent husbands until you get the joke right. The husband says consequences have to be in proportion to action; all of civilization is bad on proportionate justice. The wife says it is the same sort of men who think molesters should not be punished severely. Her husband says women have an exaggerated view of their traumas. Things go south after this.

We have seen this many times—two reasonable people have an argument, which slowly turns bitter and their positions turn extreme. So, it may appear that people only pretend to hold reasonable views and when they are pushed and provoked, they expose their extreme theologies. It may appear that there is a Taliban streak in all of us, and that is why the world has become such a sick archipelago of sacred wounds. But that is not really what is going on. What if people are better than their arguments?

In academic anthropology (by which I mean anthropology that is not art), there is something called Symmetrical Schismogenesis. In this phenomenon, people assume the opposite views of their rivals and then take these views to extremes simply to differ from the other camp.

People, in general, do not begin with extreme positions. But when they are challenged by someone sanctimonious or aggressive in other ways, or someone they do not like, and they have to defend themselves, they tend to assume a hardline position that they actually do not fully believe in. We do that because in an argument we are impelled to magnify our differences. Also, people try to create a theoretically pure version of their argument to explain their point, for which they have to appear to believe in puritanical versions of what are otherwise sensible ideas.

Most people arrive at strong opinions out of intense dislike for a particular kind of people. This is the most underrated cause of public opinion. It is not opinions that cause divisions; it is instinctive dislike that creates opinions. Simply put, people form opinions that are the exact opposite of those held by public figures they despise. In that way, they descend from the middle-ground into theology.

Thus refined scholars of something called ‘post-colonialism’ would take the extreme opposite view of what an aggressive village strongman holds; and the pragmatic Indian middle-class will take a view in sharp contrast to suave people who are always telling us what is the right thing to do in any situation. Women who have disliked the hijab begin to fight for the right of Muslim women to wear one; and Hindu women who themselves wear something that resembles the hijab oppose the garment fervently. And fans of Test cricket, who despise the facile lure of shorter versions, overstate their admiration for mediocre stonewalling batsmen.

To many scholars, Symmetrical Schismogenesis is why the world is doomed. We are drawn to the extremes. But there is a reason why the world has survived, and will survive. Schismogenesis is a way of speaking; it is not a way of being. I do not believe it has made people lose their moderate, banal middle grounds.

Most people are practical and don’t wish the extremes in their own arguments to occur. They do not easily share their views, which in any case are unremarkable. So their numbers are not reflected in the media noise. Even on Twitter, most extreme views are probably only morning cortisol.

There is us, and then there is our projection of ourselves. When we are made to defend our biases, especially by despicable people, we take extreme views but discreetly we hold our middle ground.

People who have ‘extreme right-wing’ views are better people, I notice, than what their tweets suggest. And, people who have very moral ‘left-wing’ views are not as good as their tweets would have us think. This is because both types of opinion-holders cannot match the extremes they project.

The subterranean power of the middle-ground is admirable, considering how useless the moderate stance is. It is dull compared to passionate extremes. Take one of the worst stories ever told—Goldilocks and the three bears. In this story, a girl goes into the home of three bears and has porridge that is neither too hot nor too cold, but just warm. That is it. I have covered most of the plot. The fame of the story has nothing to do with its plot. The wisdom of the middle-ground, which is what the tale is about, is usually a doomed fairytale, tweet, post, article, column, cartoon, story, poem, novel and film. In human communication, remarkable or extreme views are entertaining, hence rewarded.

One of our good fortunes is that not everyone wishes to be interesting, and it is through them that the middle ground holds a toe-hold in communication. But radicals from extreme camps keep assailing it by defaming ‘fence-sitters’ and ‘the pragmatic’, and attempt to disgrace them for not “taking a side”, and for not having the clarity of a moral position. But then, the clarity of ideology is merely the thirsty seeing very clearly a mirage. No one sees better than the deluded.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





Why Musk appears to be in search of an oppressor


2022-04-24

India’s billionaires are widely quoted, but we do not know their voice. On most matters, we don’t know what they think. When they speak, they are mostly uninteresting. They are not even boring in distinct ways. Meanwhile, some American billionaires have become more popular and influential than most politicians, writers, artists and holy men. And they have done this without paying millions to promote themselves. This is because they can say things and not be ruined in return. Elon Musk, one of the richest men ever to have lived, has used this freedom on Twitter to offer a new form of entertainment. What he does answers this question: What happens when a person has no oppressors? Yet, Musk is interesting not because a person who cannot be oppressed can say anything. That is too rudimentary; in fact, that is something even self-absorbed people with no children can apparently do. What makes Musk so fascinating may have a much more complex answer: When you have no oppressors, you would set out to find them.

Almost everyone in this world feels oppressed. They don’t like it, but it does not mean they don’t need it. Without a sense of being oppressed, people are lost. This torment satisfies the soul. Too much of it will break us, but its disappearance could send us afloat in a frictionless void.

Most of us do not seek oppression because we do not have to. It is always bearing down on us. It comes from familiar places.

When scholars speak of oppression, they make it seem as though it is something grand, like politics or history or culture, and that everyone is oppressed by the same massive force. It’s not true. They’re talking about what oppresses them, not you. We are oppressed by the familiar just a notch above us. People are seldom harmed by things that are much grander than them. You are more likely to be oppressed by a mere boss or family or a street thug than, say, an ideology. And your househelp is probably more oppressed by her husband or your security guard or you than by billionaires. Despots see their oppressor in the US. American leaders see their oppressor in half the population of America, what they call “polarisation”. In this way, many things that Elon Musk does could be part of a quest for an oppressor, a despicable force whose existence can make life more meaningful.

A few days ago, he offered to buy Twitter and take it private. He framed it as a moral action—to liberate Twitter from its “woke” employees who try to control the transmission of extreme ideas. Setting forth a moral justification is a Western habit and technique. It is not a gimmick; it is more culture. But usually, the moral cause presumes that the saviour is bigger than the evil that has to be slain. In his war against killers of absolute free speech, those hyper-moral people who think some ideas do not deserve to be transmitted, Musk conveys that he is up against something much more powerful than he is, even though he can buy up a corporation where those censors work.

Wokes can often be so far removed from goodness that they make bad guesses about what it might be. As a result, they are always fighting on behalf of others, and they can become more zealous than the people they claim to protect. Musk says they have diminished Twitter. And also made Netflix boring, as he tweeted after it revealed it had lost subscribers. It’s amusing because the success of Tesla, the electric car company that Musk bought and turned into a modern giant, owes much to the first generation of wokes who had a hip paranoia about climate change. Telsa, like Apple, is in part a woke creation. Maybe there are good wokes.

In any case, I do not think wokes have much destructive power. And, even if they number in millions, I wonder how well they can fulfil Musk’s potential requirement of oppressive friction. There are far bigger (and genuine) oppressors, such as climate change, that Musk himself has publicly identified.

Like other billionaires in the West, who cannot be oppressed by things that oppress others, Musk has been locating it in greater things, like climate. So oppressed is he by the future of our planet that he has advocated migration to Mars. Visions of such tormentors may have driven his ambitions for years, making him pursue various technologies, send off rockets and dig tunnels on earth to transform how we travel.

It must be hard for Musk to find oppressors in humans, but he finds them in machines. He is among the wealthy people, like Bill Gates, who have warned of extreme artificial intelligence and advanced dumb machines that could misunderstand instructions, go rogue and end up colonizing the world.

It may appear that Musk is not as oppressed by the idea of death as other American billionaires who have invested in finding a cure for ageing. But it must be oppressive for him too, even if it’s not an inevitability anymore but just another rival. Musk reportedly expects to liberate himself from death by downloading his brain onto a computer.

As a very wealthy man, Elon Musk must inescapably be something of an oppressor himself. These days, the banal unhappiness of adulthood has a special name, ‘stress’, and perpetrators of it are called ‘capitalists’. Like Jeff Bezos of Amazon, Musk too has been accused to driving his employees hard.

A few days ago, amused by how few people show up for work at Twitter’s head office, Musk suggested that it be turned into a shelter for the homeless. This was a response to a method that ordinary people have adopted to fight their oppressors—by being bad slaves and spending more time on what they love. That, Musk does too.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





India’s complicated relationship with air-conditioning


2022-05-01

India is a like an Indian who is not poor anymore but still behaves that way because poverty has made him think small. India considers sugar an ‘essential’ and air-conditioning a luxury. If the poor are not miserable, India appears to wonder, what is the whole point of escaping poverty? As with many simple things, India has a complicated relationship with air-conditioning.

Heat surrounds us. Most of India is hot most of the time. Intense heat is an Indian inevitability, yet we treat it as a transient disease for which permanent measures are not required. Indians should not be dying of heat; they should not have to be trapped for hours in steamy cauldrons. That very option should not exist. By now, we should have solved our heat problem. All our trains and buses should have been air-conditioned. But India mostly subsidizes misery, not comfort.

Public transport that is not air-conditioned is very cheap in India. Air-conditioning all of public transport would raise costs many folds. Every time a bureaucrat or politician points this out, a grimace appears on their faces. It is not a reaction to the economics of it, but to the bitterness of imagining the average Indian travelling “in AC”. Some officials also say that any expensive public good will be damaged by people, or stolen. But, to begin with, they point out that Indians would not pay more for comfort, even if it is a fraction of the actual cost. In that, they are right.

The average Indian has low standards for life—for beautiful spaces, time, hygiene and comfort. He is willing to wake up at dawn and commute two hours in heat and dust, and return late at night. He plays no sport, does not date and spends very little on fun, even if he is a drinker. He overspends only if there is a sacrificial quality to it—like his child’s education or sister’s wedding.

When I was 21, my employer transferred me to Mumbai and gave me a “second-AC” train ticket. I sold the ticket because I thought air-conditioning was an unnecessary luxury and I could instead use the money to survive my first few weeks in Mumbai. It was one of the most foolish decisions of my life. The 24-hour journey from Madras to Mumbai in peak summer in a hot metal box was pure misery. I did not anticipate how much water I would need, and had to go thirsty for long spells; and in any case, the fake bottled-water at stations seemed more dangerous than dehydration. People fainted, and that seemed to be usual on such journeys. I was ashamed of how small my thinking had become. Society should have trained me to be generous to myself; instead, it had made me feel vulgar about travelling “in AC” when money had more sacred uses.

Across all rungs of India’s poor and middle-class, there is a miserliness that is somewhat respectfully known as “price consciousness”. This ‘consciousness’ deems quality of life an inessential aspect of life. All our social pettiness is embodied in this. Yet, it has a sacred aura, as though we must speak of this miserliness only with great compassion. This is because observers of Indian miserliness, like economists, entrepreneurs, bureaucrats, politicians, journalists and writers, have never been poor, and they make some poor guesses. They seem to think that choosing suffering over comfort, and ugliness over beauty is the right of people who feel poor. I don’t agree. Indian ‘price-consciousness’ is a way of thinking and it is often an expensive choice. It has undocumented co-morbidities. People die trying to save money. The nation itself loses more by not spending enough. Take, for instance, why we don’t shut the doors of local trains in Mumbai.

Every day, thousands of men dangle from the doorways of those local trains as though to gape at something extraordinary that has occurred outside. Hundreds fall off and die annually. Yet, these trains haven’t installed automatic doors—because there are so many people aboard, they would suffocate if the doors were shut. The answer is to have trains air-conditioned, but they are not because Mumbai commuters would rather travel in this manner—dangling, sweating— than pay more for tickets. Many of them can afford to live better, but they will not.

In surveys conducted by the Indian Railways and others as part of Mumbai’s long contemplation of underground transit, an overwhelming majority of train commuters said that between travelling in humid compartments and paying more for AC, they would prefer misery. It is the same story in other cities. Metro systems have sprung up across India despite the average Indian’s threat that he will not pay for the service.

Until a few years ago, when Uber and other taxi-hailing apps transformed these services in India, a local commute was a humid affair. If you did not have a car, and you happened to perspire profusely, you arrived for a meeting drenched, as though it was raining. As a reporter, I have met many important figures in shirts that had become translucent. To maintain poise and hold on to your dignity in that state was an art form.

Mumbai did have air-conditioned taxies and they were blue to signify coolness. There were not many of them and their distinction somehow gave their drivers the confidence to fleece you. In any case, their air-conditioners did not work very well.

You needed to own a car in Mumbai to arrive at a place dry, until Uber and other taxi-hailing apps started operations. But Indians are so ‘price conscious’ that these services are unable to maintain minimal standards of quality. The cabs are unreliable, dirty and always white. I have wandered so far away from my Indian roots that I would pay ₹100 extra for an Uber that is not white.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





An application for the job of Twitter’s chief executive


2022-05-08

As I tell my readers once every six months (because people forget what I tell them), there are only four kinds of people. The actor, the fan, the builder and the philosopher. You are an actor. A builder, too. But fundamentally, an actor. And actor is a blank canvas on whom people can project what they wish to see. Actors tend to hire fans. Most billionaires hire fans. The fan is an admirer of success and an imitator of successful people. Fans may be the most hired people in the world. Indian CEOs who are ubiquitous in the Valley have the bearing of fans. In any office, fans rise because they are unthreatening. You, Elon, are an actor-builder who is likely to hire a fan. What you need, though, is a philosopher.

You may think you know Indians because America is filled with them, but they are a bit different from people like me. I have never studied in the West, or even lived there for more than 180 days at a stretch. It is impossible for the West to colonize me. As a result, I can see Western morality for what it really is—it is a way of speaking and not a way of being. I sense that you see it, too, as you too come from another place.

You come from South Africa, a country of stark inequality. I am certain that your family and friends often said the right things. But they never really transformed the lives of the poor majority. So, somewhere in your head you might know that morality is a way of speaking.

This means I can see your fight for “free speech” emerges from a culture that cannot do anything without first couching a plan in morals. But why waste time on morals when you can be honest, when you have a more intelligent and logical reason to make Twitter a neutral platform: Twitter can be consistent only if it is not human.

As CEO, I would draw your attention to how Western morality has made Twitter expensive. Not as a company, the one that you are in the middle of buying. You are, of course, paying more than what people who would never be able to buy it, like columnists, say is its fair price. But then, how else can one buy something that is not for sale? When I say Twitter is expensive, I mean it as a platform to advertise on. Generally, it is much more expensive than Facebook.

About 15 years ago, an Indian billionaire told me why The New York Times was doomed: Because good journalism, by its very nature, is negative, and no one wants to advertise on an unhappy page. Twitter, in general perception, is an unhappy space. This makes it less attractive for advertisers than, say, Instagram, but what makes Twitter expensive on top of being unattractive is the moral campaign against Facebook and social media in general by the vanquished Western liberal establishment. The consecration of privacy, the denial that the anonymous data of your boring life is a public resource, the promotion of the myth that Russians interfered with American elections and other hyper-moral campaigns have forced social media platforms to make themselves inefficient as advertising vehicles.

To solve this problem, you need to be generous to Facebook. I know that you are among the people who have defamed it. If it was in preparation for buying Twitter, well done, but you are hurting yourself by going all sanctimonious on it. I must confess that of all American billionaires, I like Mark Zuckerberg the most, and one I have no doubt at all is good in a banal way, which is the only way we can be good.

You must not underestimate the power of leftish lament.

Increasingly, tech people are behaving like writers. Most writers, and other types of artists, have a sense of failure—because they are in reality entrepreneurs and they are bitter because they have not succeeded as well as some of their peers. As more smart people in tech quit being salaried executives and attempt to be entrepreneurs, we have a world that was never so bitter. We must learn from artists what bitterness does. Not better art, but the opposite of art—activism. Whine and lament, which used to be the preserve of artists, have now entered the soul of tech. They will amplify any news that diminishes a successful company or person. All this may not bother you as an individual, but makes Twitter expensive.

A soulless robotic all-knowing social media platform is the only way a person who is not picked by the old corrupt establishment can transmit ideas to the world. And Twitter should find ways to make itself affordable to the small guy.

Look, Elon, jobs have always come to me without my seeking them. This is only the second time in my life I am applying for a job. The first was when Pope Benedict XVI resigned and I applied for his job. (I am Roman Catholic and celibate on most days.) The Vatican didn’t get back, and I hope you don’t make the same mistake.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





India is not as interesting to the world as we may think


2022-05-15

Many Indians feel they are stuck with Indians, that they are so good they “belong in the first world”. That what they do is export quality, but they have not been lucky enough to draw the attention of the world. There are Indian entrepreneurs, writers, artists, academics and activists who feel they would be recognized only in “the West”. As a result, many things that Indians do is for international recognition. Prestige is something that comes from outside India. But the fact is that the world is not as interested in India as Indians imagine.

No one is curious about us anymore, or has much respect for us, or is fond of us in any special way. Few find us interesting. In general, the world does not care about us. We are on nobody’s radar. We are neither cool nor hot. The world wishes to learn nothing from us. In the perception of the ordinary folks, India is not so important. I was reminded of this when I visited France and Germany in April. But this is not an opinion born out of recent travel alone, though by ‘world’ I mean the ‘West’, and I know you, too, do. It is not that we don’t matter; it is just that we have become a boring middling region.

The history of the world’s interest in India is probably long. Once we were rich, then esoteric, as charlatans promoted exotic ideas about us. As the West prospered, some of its rich found relief from their anxieties in a quest for meaning, which they thought was hidden somewhere in India. Later, in the modern world, I was a witness to how excited and fearful the world was about our seemingly inexhaustible cheap labour in technology. Around this time, hope arose for a new West in democratic India. The hope was that we would become a huge market for Western goods, like China, but nicer, more docile and comprehensible than China. All that hope and interest has gone. Today, we are not too rich or too poor; we have not done badly, our poor are not as heartbreaking as Africa’s. We are beyond condescension, but neither equals nor rivals of the West. As a story, we are dull.

The only thing that makes India interesting to ordinary people in the West are the country’s supposed flaws—the popularity of Narendra Modi, his long confusing hugs of other world leaders, his refusal to condemn Russia in return for cheap oil, and the perception that Muslims in India are persecuted.

Modi’s public image in the West appears poor. He is not yet demonized as Vladimir Putin was long before he attacked Ukraine, but that may only be because India is not so relevant to them. Modi’s image there may not worsen, but is unlikely to improve because the moral compass of the West requires villains. Even Aung San Suu Kyi has been cancelled after she stopped talking like a righteous school girl and developed the complexities of a practical politician of a difficult nation. Modi’s image will not be rescued by Western conservatives because there is no such thing as a global right-wing. The right, everywhere, is local, and when it comes to foreign issues where the stakes are low, they exhibit the same righteous indignation as liberals.

This is different from how ordinary people in the West view Chinese President Xi Jinping. He is not a mere strongman who is framed by China’s atrocities. His image in the West is more complex than that of Modi; Xi is seen as a man in control of one of the most influential regions in the world. Everyone is interested in what he has to say, what China has to say.

It is odd that I must be reminded of the irrelevance of India on a trip to Paris for a book fair where India was “the guest of honour”. The French embassy of India took me there to talk to the French. I even have a publisher in France who has translated all my novels. Isn’t this interest? Most Indian readers may not have read a single French author, not even Camus. But then, the fact is my French publisher has lost money betting on me. Not many Indian novels are translated into French and most of them sell only a few hundred copies.

There were large crowds of book-lovers at the book fair who were mostly interested in their own nation, Europe, the rest of the West, and maybe Africa, which has returned as the new flavour. I don’t think anyone even knew India was “the guest of honour”. India drew attention when some Indian dancers hammed a folk dance. These days when I hear ‘mast qalandar’ in a global setting, I know some Indians are selling ‘the world’ lemons.

Now and then, the West does reward an Indian writer or activist, but even that is evidence of their self-absorption because the subject of their appreciation is usually someone who talks like them, writes like them, has the same values as them, or is fighting a battle they have sponsored in complex ways.

Our interest in the West, too, is waning, but it is still high. We absorb Western culture, values, truths and half-truths, and many of us choose to live in a world where Westerners hold all the cards. We know what not caring about a region means because we don’t care for most of the world. We find it hard to accept that we are as peripheral to the West as Africa is to us.

In the global exchange of interest, there is a big deficit. It is time to stop denying that. If a wide spectrum of creators across industries realize that India is all they have and they learn to respect the domestic market more, and accept that all foreign contracts are only a matter of lottery, maybe they would do things differently. But we should continue to tell the India story to the West. Just that we have to first figure out how to tell a story that nobody really cares about.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





Four major national flaws that unite Indian citizens


2022-05-22

Many of us have wondered, on days we were underemployed, what unites India. For some reason, when people want to understand what unites a society, they think the reasons have to be virtuous or beautiful. As a result, we have been given spurious reasons for what binds us together—like Hindi cinema, cricket, English and democracy. In reality, what often unites people are their vices.

Here is a list of India’s national flaws.

1) The Indian family is a cartel: When your nation is richer than your family, you can rebel against your family and claim independence. But when your family is rich and your nation poor, you assume “family values” and conform to traditions. The importance of the Indian family, from what I have seen first-hand in Madras, Kerala, Mumbai and Delhi, is that when the country is undependable, only the family can give you an unfair advantage over others. It is the power of the family that has created a certain meekness among India’s elite, especially its men. It’s a quality that defines the country’s upper classes. Across the nation and a vast swathe of time, women in urban India have lamented that Indian men are eager boyfriends, but when it comes to marriage, they go with their mother’s pick. If Indian women dated poor men, they may not face this. The richer the boyfriend, the more difficult his parents.

2) The reason that India is safest for the rich: There is something odd about how safe India is for its middle classes and rich. Street mugging is nearly unheard of, deaths from violent crime for money are rare. This could be because the well-off in India, do not walk enough on the streets to be mugged. We minimize the time we have to spend in a public space, and we generally fear the worst, so take precautions. But there is another reason why India is safe: the informal suspension of human rights in police stations and the general cruelty of the justice system.

For most criminals in India, getting caught by the police is an extremely expensive development. This is true across regions. Until recently, Kerala, despite its reputation for communist-grade healthcare and education, had a very cruel police force. There is probably no part of India where the police are not feared by common people. What the police and justice system cannot achieve through competence, they achieve in informal ways.

3) Indians are misers: Before the advent of taxi-hailing apps and cheap rides in white cars, people had a foe in the auto-rickshaw guy. One of the most irritating things about Indian life was this guy asking for “something over the metre”. But then, we should have thought of the matter in a different way. Travel in India is cheap; it is probably underpriced. Many prices are pegged to affordability by the poor. As a result, the poor actually subsidize our lives. So, the auto guy asking for more money is only a request to not be fleeced by those of us who can afford to pay. Ideally, we should be leaking money. Instead of arguing with the auto guy, we should be stuffing notes in his pocket. But then, we are a miserly society. Most of what Indians hail as austerity and “price consciousness” is merely a form of small-mindedness born out of long years of insecurity. Our corporations, too, are stingy. They do not have the heart to invest in research and development. That is a reason why industrialists tend to overrate that nonsensical Indian phenomenon called ‘jugaad’, which is a cheap and eventually expensive way of doing something by bending rules. Also, our rich give away very little in organized charity; they are more likely to donate money to God.

4) Everyone thinks he is Chanakya: Not many in India have read the Arthashastra, but almost everyone knows or thinks he knows a synopsis of this ancient treatise. In the national imagination, its author Chanakya is a cunning practical man. No one wants his frugal diet; but many are eager to adopt his rumoured practicality, his “statecraft”, which is usually a melodramatic justification for doing some nasty things. To follow a man and not follow his diet is to completely misunderstand him.

We speak a lot about morality, bloviate on spirituality as though we are all very divine, but in practice, at any given point in time, there is probably a subconscious national feeling in all of us that there are advantages in twisting rules.

This is why we do not have any order when we drive or plan cities. Chaos comforts us as something innately human. As a consequence, Indians are among those who have the poorest quality of life. There is not a single city that promises natural beauty, clean air, ease of travel or easy access to outdoor activities. I know captive animals in Europe that live better than most Indian millionaires.

Yet, most of our protests are about esoteric matters that will not transform our lives. That is another thing which unites Indians—the stamina for useless issues.

India’s national flaws are not always grand. There are smaller things that affect all of us as much. I wish to particularly defame the fact that across India, people invite you to dinner but will not serve food until very late in the night; also, everywhere in the country, if there are two gates, one will be kept shut because of a national belief that if some hardship is imposed on people, some good comes out of it. Also, you know you are in India when a cop and a culprit walk hand-in-hand to court. And, during every political rally, anywhere in our country, when a guy is giving a speech, his side-kick will come and whisper something in his ear as though it can’t wait.

There is much that unites us. We have been looking in all the wrong places.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





The extraordinary human rights of animals in India


2022-05-29

I can see it on their smug faces. Across Gurugram, cows sense a bright future. They stand on various roads looking in one direction, like before, but there are more of them than ever and they are left like this for hours by their minders because nobody now dares to evict cows; it’s not like they are mere slum dwellers. So they amble about, blocking traffic, occasionally nudging a biker and sending him rolling. Stray dogs, too, are enjoying a good life, especially after a high court clarified that they have “a right to be fed in their territory”.

For animals, India is like an advanced nation. In the West, humans talk a lot about animal welfare, but there are very few free animals. Stray dogs and cattle do not appear to have a right to life. Europe, in particular, is a complete triumph of the Biblical man. All animals are subordinate to humans, and those who cannot be subjugated have long been terminated, whole dangerous majestic species wiped out to make the world a safer place for humans. As an Indian, what I find most entertaining about Europe is that I can walk for days into a cute thing called the ‘woods’ and emerge alive. This is more difficult in the US but not improbable. It would be eventless in New Zealand where there are no snakes even.

The West talks a lot about the welfare of animals; in fact, all talk about animal welfare in India by posh people is derived from Western sermons, but it is a post-apocalypse time in the West for the animal world.

In India, a lone human may not last a day in a jungle. The animal habitat is an unambiguous space. But the human habitat is an ambiguous space that is shared by humans and animals. The law and its practice in this regard are ambiguous too. In a city, is my right of way superior to the right of a stray cow or dog? I do not know. I only know that lovers and hawkers can be removed from the streets.

Animals in India appear to have extraordinary human rights. But this emerges not from our romance with nature, because modern Indians are the worst thing that can happen to nature. It does not emerge from any modern sophistication, ancient moral code or tradition either. The reason animals thrive in India is a combination of administrative incompetence, allergy to order, the familiarity of informality and the success of secular Western evangelism of animal rights that has influenced us to adopt animal welfare laws that are the world’s most sophisticated. The interaction between Indians and animals is usually unsophisticated. It has a quality of antiquity. The antiquity is in the absence of over-articulation of what animals mean to us.

The average Indian does not think much about the place of animals. He has not formalized what animals mean to him; he has barely formalized what a road lane or traffic signal means. Some animals are sacred and useful, some are dangerous and rare, some tasty; and many are underdogs, and hence endearing. We have no particular interest in the welfare of animals, even if some of them are sacred. Sacred beings are not assured of a good life in India. Let us not forget that women are worshipped too.

A few days ago, a leopard killed a woman in Uttarakhand. It was captured and caged by forest officials. When local villagers got to know of this, they burnt the leopard in its cage, in vengeance. Those who did this face severe legal consequences. This event captures many aspects of Indian life: a certain banal reality in an ancient nation filled with wild beasts; the fury of a mob whose ways are as ancient as the leopard’s; and the intervention of a modern law—for the leopard.

Many of India’s troubles arise from the fact that it imports foreign solutions for unique problems. Influenced by societies that have not seen a leopard in centuries, or probably ever, we assume that a leopard belongs in a forest. This is convenient for everyone; also, this is how a society operates that demarcates human and animal habitats. We should know better. A natural habitat is an ambiguous thing. It is wherever there is easy food. What the leopard has been trying to say is that it likes human settlements. There is a lot of slow easy prey here. But forest officials have been “rescuing” leopards and banishing them to the forest. And these cats have been finding their way back. There are leopards in the sugarcane districts of Maharashtra that have probably never seen a forest. They like it here, so what can we do?

My own relationship with animals has changed with my circumstances. I have generally been friends with stray dogs, except when on a bike, or running at dawn. After the Bhuj earthquake, when whole villages collapsed, stray dogs grew very aggressive after feeding on human corpses under rubble.

Stray dogs in cities are mostly docile, but they are dangerous to unattended children, especially the poor whose ‘natural habitat’ is the streets. Many kids have been mauled or eaten, and thousands bitten. In Bionotes, a journal, Ryan Lobo and Meghna Uniyal write that India records over 20,000 deaths annually from rabies and the actual number could be many times more. They argue that Western activists whose notions of animal welfare have been rejected in their own nations see India as fertile ground for some extreme ideas. As a result, they say, animal welfare in India is at the expense of human safety, especially of the poor.

Animal welfare in India is also shaped by something very Indian. At a fundamental level, we are not as morally certain as Christian dominated civilizations that humans are more equal than animals. As you can see, on the question of how to keep Indians safe from animals, this column itself is ambiguous.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





Why Gyanvapi does not have the resonance Babri did


2022-06-05

In my neighbourhood park, old women sit in a circle and chant. One of them does not know the words. For years, she would just move her lips, and compensate by clapping or nodding with greater fervour than the actual singers. Now she has stopped pretending too. She sits with them, at peace with herself. She reminds me of the average modern Hindu faced with Hindu issues.

When the Ram Janmabhoomi movement reached its peak in the early 1990s, he felt the passion of collective rage even though he may not have known any Ram bhajan or the Hanuman Chalisa. He participated in the movement by lip-syncing devotion but in honest fervour. Since then, every time another Hindu wound from another time surfaced, his anger was sought. He played along with diminishing interest. But now I don’t think old Hindu wounds anger him.

Like the recent discovery in Varanasi’s Gyanvapi mosque of an object some Hindus claim is a Shivling, and some claim is the top of a water fountain. This is a classic issue for the Hindu right, but one that appears to have evoked little mainstream emotion. From what I gather, even among common Hindus who despise the fact that the Mughals built mosques over temples, the issue does not stir any particular rage. Over the past three decades, the average Hindu has evolved from being truly angry into someone who must support or mouth or feign anger to sustain his cultural reclamation of India, and then into a self-assured person who is unable to pretend anymore.

That some Muslim students wear the hijab, that the sacred cow can be food, and that a Shiv idol may have been found in a mosque are not trivial issues from the point of view of political journalism, but they do not really whip up as much anger anymore as some beneficiaries of this emotion may hope.

Like how poets are the main consumers of poetry, people who are stirred by these Hindu issues today are mostly the very creators of such issues. They are a minority of particular personality types: People who are preoccupied with hatred for Muslims, and those whose mental states make them susceptible to any kind of cultural rage, which includes people who call themselves “liberals” and overreact to any Hindu complaint, and politicians who hope to benefit from hate.

If you do not trust your gut instinct of society, you may want to consider a substantive piece of evidence that points to how lacking in emotion the Gyanvapi issue is. The fount of modern Hindu nationalism, the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) and its political creation, the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), have not played up the Shivling matter. They have not ignored it, but they have not made a very big deal of it. We can argue that the BJP is calm about the matter because there is no major election coming up and the party wants to improve its global image.

Even so, its subdued response reflects its reading that the Hindu society is tired of such issues and that whipping up passions on such matters have diminishing returns.

The RSS position is even more significant. On Thursday, its head Mohan Bhagwat showed mild contempt for Hindus who seek to probe every major mosque for a Hindu past. In a speech, he said that any reminder of the destruction of temples is not without pain, “but why seek an issue every day; why escalate? Why search for a Shivling in every mosque… What happens in a mosque, that too is a form of a worship… Muslims too are us… Our faith matters a lot to us, but everyone’s faith matters a lot to him…We accept that, we (as a nation) are that.”

In recent times, even though he rarely loses a chance to say that Islam came through foreign conquerors, he has used the same fact to identify Indian Muslims as the same stock as Indian Hindus. Also, Bhagwat has often suggested that modern Hindus need to think in new ways. He said in his speech that the temple in Ayodhya needed a revolution; since that is over and done now, Hindus do not need to be in “andolan” (mobilization) mode anymore. “We are a nation not because of a language, or a single form of worship, or geographic space.” He dwelt on diversity, implying that we are a nation because we are many things that constitute India, including the moral idea that every faith deserves to exist. He also referred to Sanatan Dharma as humanism, as truth that would make India a teacher to the world, and that this had to be put in practice: “Truth does not have its own legs, it needs power.” He seemed to imply that the RSS was an ideal power that could transmit the truths of Hinduism. The RSS chief said that Hindus should fear nothing, but they also should not frighten anyone.

All this also explains why not only the RSS, but also the average Hindu of sound mind is not so triggered by Gyanvapi and other such issues. A cultural battle has been won. There is no reason anymore for an average Hindu to feel insecure in India anymore. He now has the luxury of becoming a better Hindu and aspire to world influence.

Nehruvians and other Indians who eat asparagus do not trust the RSS. They scoff at every attempt Bhagwat has made to reassure ordinary Muslims. They constantly remind us of the history of the RSS and speak of Nazi inspiration. This is amusing because Nehruvians like to laugh at people who still blame all of India’s failings on Nehru. But they act the same way, trapped in history.

Historians may have trained us to over-rate history. But we are not always a creation of where we came from. We can be better than our history.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





Why there is something wrong with the Indian buffet


2022-06-13

If you want to make Indians laugh, show them what Europeans call a “buffet”. Even in a luxury hotel, the spread is so small it would fit into an Indian’s glance, which by nature is sweeping. At one cunning Parisian hotel, the buffet plate was the width of my palm, probably to discourage guests from piling on too many things. On the other hand, in most of Asia, especially India, the five-star buffet is designed to convey that the hotel made a loss on it. The buffet is such a sprawl of dishes that one has to first circumnavigate the entire spread just to get the lay of the land. Still, there would be surprises, nooks from where food emerges and some things that are not displayed but can be requested or extorted.

There is something very wrong with the Indian buffet. To understand why this is so, meander with me a bit, as though we are at a vast buffet of Indian maladies.

The Indian buffet is primarily a spectacle. The food also is, but mostly the people, especially as they fill their plates—some of them in their pyjamas. They feel at home; they are eating at the same address where they sleep, and they pay to sleep here, and that must be a definition of home. So they appear in clothes they would otherwise never wear if they were going to be in the line of vision of a hundred odd strangers. Maybe they wear pyjamas because they wish their bellies to be unencumbered during this limitless meal.

There is so much to choose from in an Indian buffet that people are able to fill their plates according to their mental states. The plates of large people are usually filled with fruits, which is usually their first course when in public. They are also happy to display a plate of fruits, unlike the later trips to the spread that are usually more discreet. But mostly people fill their plates with bread and sugar, because most people are honest in their preferences most of the time.

The whole buffet scene is like a rave party, with distressed waiters dealing in sugar and maida; and addicts of these two sources of nourishment wanting more and more, shouting for the attention of the dealers, asking why something is taking so long, how long must they wait; how long must their poor starving children wait before the next fix. These anxious food addicts are aware that waiters here, unlike in the West, are too powerless to ever tell them, “It’s a buffet, go and take it yourself.” Surveying all this is the sanctimonious guy on a low-carb diet, for whom there is nothing much in the spread, but he consoles himself by saying that man does not need much.

The buffet is an overt exhortation to eat as much as you can, which means consume more than you need to. Everything about food and feeding is about excess and space.

Even a modest buffet, like what is offered on a Hindi film set, requires a back-end supply system that occupies considerable space, and it is not merely physical space. I have always associated Indian film sets with eating. The place reeks of food and the remains of food. One of the first vehicles that comes onto the location is the caterer’s van. And the most gloomy part of a set are those uneven cheap aluminium tables with shrouds of white cloth on them, apart from the unhappy men who make elaborate but vacuous food items and pour them into massive vats.

In an important way, the Indian buffet, especially at a five-star resort, is similar to Indian democracy. Every major region is represented and there is a sense that there is something for everyone. To be precise, everyone with a substantive voice, that is. The buffet reflects its own tyranny of the majority. The minority which is very fit is not represented, and even the few things that the superfit get to eat are there because some famous foods are, somehow, by some miracle, healthy.

At the end of it, much of the Indian buffet ends up wasted. Some people tell me that about half the food in a typical buffet goes waste. This horrifies most Indians, including those given to saying they would never forgive a five-star hotel for not having a buffet breakfast. But then, I have never fully grasped the horror in wastage. As in, I do not know why wastage is a such bad thing. What is the difference if a kilo of biryani is eaten by some guy who does not need so much food, or wasted as uneaten food on his plate, or left in a vat on a buffet spread to be thrown away? The food has been paid for at every stage, and if leftovers are eventually given away to animals and microbes, whose existence completes a complex ecosystem, what is so tragic about this? The planet’s crisis of carbon emission and fresh-water depletion does not become any more bearable because a guy sits and eats his entire serving of biryani.

Still, there is a certain vulgarity in excess and wastage, especially in a poor country.

Consider a massive Indian five-star buffet from the point of view of a new waiter who has arrived from a distant impoverished village. After he recovers from the discovery that a single meal in the hotel costs about half his monthly salary perhaps, imagine what goes through his head when he sees people taking heaps of delicious things and leaving them all behind, or when the hotel throws away hundreds of kilos of perfectly edible food. It is vulgar.

Often, vulgarity itself has no consequence for us. But it is hard to deny that vulgarity is a way of disrespecting the unlucky. Some hotels say they have a system of giving away excess food to the poor, but I do not fully buy this. Even if this is true, it is still vulgar to send decaying food to the poor.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





Why our road minister’s statements make us so happy


2022-06-19

Every now and then, a man from the government says modern things. Then nothing happens, and he returns to say more modern things. He has the air of someone from the 80s. Yet, among all Indian politicians, he says the most urban things.

Nitin Gadkari, India’s minister of road transport and highways, almost never talks about grand but useless things; instead, he talks about things like parking and roads. On Thursday, he said he was mulling a reward of ₹500 for any Indian who betrays a vehicle parked in the wrong place to the authorities. In the recent past, he has mulled over increasing fines for traffic violations many folds, reducing deaths on Indian roads by 50%, ensuring that all government vehicles be electric, building “multi-level hybrid flyovers” and changing all vehicular horns to sounds of Indian musical instruments. Recently, he set a daily target of building 60km of highways.

Gadkari appears at press conferences where he offers details like a chief executive. Once when a journalist asked for toll exemptions for the press, Gadkari said Indians should learn to pay for services. Also, he uses a hydrogen-powered car.

In contrast, every time Prime Minister Narendra Modi has pitched modernity, he has been inscrutable—for instance, he said India should build “twin cities” and “smart cities”, and that what the world thinks is climate change might merely be the inability of ageing people to endure weather.

Gadkari is today a harbinger of simple joys, even though urban Indians are not so naive as to believe that everything he says will come true. A few years ago, he said Indians tend to plan for a year; we should instead plan for 100 years. Who else in the government says things like that? Most of the time, he is only mulling, and not doing. Even so, we are not used to politicians who know how to mull what is good for the pubic.

An unsung source of small human joys is any news of future infrastructure. Something about bridges and roads of the future in a place familiar to us makes us feel that life is going to be more interesting than the banal present. If we ever compile the history of news on the future of commuting, we will realize that most of it never came true, but all the honest fantasies of prophets of urban planning did bring some hope to their generation. It is in that way Gadkari makes us happy.

His rise to national prominence is a bit odd. Why has it happened? He was never a mass leader. Not so suave like Arun Jaitley that he could never win an election. Still, in a country where there is probably only one national politician, Gadkari does not have much public appeal beyond some pockets. Usually, people who are very useful to their organizations but are not superstars remain unknown and useful. But there is a mysterious and ethereal force that promotes him. What else can explain the fact that when he says something sensible and modern about civic order, which normally is not as newsworthy as esoteric useless things, his words get prominent media coverage?

This makes me feel that Gadkari’s mulling is a part of the ongoing cultural reformation of Indian society, and that in the future, Hindu nationalism is not going to be only about Hinduism or nationalism, but also about civic order and quality of life. I await this transition of nationalism from pride to something more useful—like shame.

India is a middle-income nation that behaves like a poor nation. There is simply no economic reason anymore why India has to be so difficult to its own people. But Gadkari is more harbinger than prophet. He is more successful with statements of intent than execution. The reason why Gadkari’s mulling never changes anything is the same as why all of India’s good intentions fail. Gadkari and India keep asking Indians to do the right things—drive in your lane, park correctly, follow the rules. But this is not how advanced countries created civic order. Those governments first did a spectacular job of creating conducive conditions. They made good roads and trains and platforms, used intelligent design that made flouting rules difficult and provided people all the facilities needed to ensure only malevolent motives could lead them to break the law. On the other hand, in India the road design itself, and even traffic signals, can kill us.

If a government does its job well, citizens would follow its rules. Many of our bureaucrats don’t believe that. They have a dim view of Indians. They say if you provide the best infrastructure, Indians will make it the worst, or even steal it. This is a country where a whole iron bridge was stolen. Administrators have a misanthropic view; they despise people. I am not going to say they must have nobler view of people because there is no evidence that people are noble. In fact, I feel that the problem with Indian administrators is not misanthropy, but its wrong application.

Contrary to what administrators say, across the world, when a government creates a public utility of great quality, citizens follow all the rules. There is evidence even in India: the Delhi Metro. The adherence to rules on this and other such air-conditioned transit systems is many notches higher than what Indians exhibit on the roads. It is as though we are a proper middle-income nation aboard the Metro and a banana republic outside. The reason is not mutual respect. People don’t follow rules out of gratitude or regard for infrastructure creators. It is the fear that if someone can run a good service, it will also be good at implementing hefty fines.

Civic order originates in fear. Every other origin is merely a lamer word for that.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





The thin line between joy and misery on family holidays


2022-06-26

Married people go to some of the most beautiful places on earth to fight. I once saw a couple, standing in a spectacular cove, arguing over something, after which the man flung his wallet on the beach and walked away; his wife, remarkably, picked it up, and went the other way. In Cinque Terre, a cluster of coastal villages in Italy, a man who had to carry two huge suitcases uphill and his wife, who had probably given the taxi driver the wrong address, said nasty things to each other in the backdrop of the Mediterranean Sea. Later, on the main street, a woman dragged a suitcase, sobbing. No one knew why, but could guess. There is a certain trauma that can only be caused by the other sex. Often I have felt that a couple visiting a war memorial is war that has come to make fun of a memorial.

This April in South Goa, the quiet of a resort was shaken by a woman in a suite screaming at her husband. She was saying she had had enough, that he was useless, that she was going back home with the kids. The husband’s defence, if there was one, was not audible. The next day, she yelled again with new information. A few weeks ago, as a flight from Paris landed in Delhi, an angry woman told her husband, who was rocking an infant, that she is never travelling with the baby or him ever again. It was pure misery, she said. The husband rocked the baby harder, as if to remind her that he does not slacken on his domestic chores. Even in Antarctica, as a cruise-liner passed by giant icebergs, an old couple on the deck fought over a chore the man had failed to do that morning.

I have often considered starting a movement to ban people who have been married for over seven years from entering beautiful places for the same reason why toxic industries are banned in such paradises.

Yet, it is for them that the beautiful places wait and it is for them that the finest inventions of the travel industry exist. The lone leisure traveller exists, but is rarer and less precious than a family on vacation. Even though people spend a lot on themselves, when it comes to travel, they feel they are not worth it at all as individuals and splurge only when such an expense can be witnessed by their most powerful critics—their family.

In plain sight, it certainly does appear that people love family vacations. In fact, all life on earth appears to be sombre people waiting to go on a family vacation.

This summer, the urban Indian middle-class made passionate travel plans, having been restricted by the pandemic for two years. And for most Indians, probably most people in the world, a vacation means a family holiday. But do families really enjoy these? I do very much, but I am never surprised when I look around and see marriages and families falling apart on vacation. I never see so many distraught people back home and I almost never see miserable locals. Anywhere on earth, the most visibly unhappy people are families on vacation.

The objective of a vacation is to flee home, but then philosophically, spatially, spiritually and emotionally, a large part of home is the family. Thus, on a family vacation, people flee home without realizing that they are carrying most of their home along. In fact, when they were back home, they didn’t have to share so much time and space with each other. Everyone had their own rooms, routines, work and friends. But on a vacation, a family is thrown together. A family is many beautiful things, but it is also a fellowship of wounds and grouses. And when this fellowship is squeezed into a space smaller than home for long days, things can go wrong in memorable ways.

A middle-class Indian couple with an infant on a first world holiday will mostly suffer. Without the cheap labour of a maid and their mothers, they will be in shock. Everything that Europeans make look easy—like cycling or kayaking with infants strung somewhere—looks very difficult when Indians try to imitate it. Older children are not so much trouble beyond their whining about how bored they are, unaware that the vacation is too expensive to say stuff like this.

The other Indian demographic group that suffers on foreign vacations is of old parents who have been brought out of gratitude. You walk down, say, London or New York, and you would see an old couple from an Indian small town, looking dazed by the amount of walking they need to do, the hard work that is required to use the metro system, the extraordinary taxi fares as though the West defines hyperinflation, and the inedible food. Sometimes, there is no torture like the gratitude of your children.

Tourism is a recent invention, especially tourism for people who are not part of a royal family. For most of our history, people travelled on work or on pilgrimage, or because they had no choice. A whole family moving to another town to squeeze into a smaller home, for fun, is still a bit odd.

People who have experienced love, companionship or children, or are in the embrace of a home in other ways, find it hard to holiday alone. What the lone traveller in a beautiful place misses is context. Why are you here? That you are some place all by yourself because it is beautiful is not a convincing answer. It is not just that we need to share a moment. We also need to be witnessed. Without a witness to our day, we are anonymous. It is as though life does not take our memory of ourselves seriously; it needs another memory to confirm it. Human experience is a two-factor authentication of an event. From this arises the entire tourism industry, and a bit of strife.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





There’s justice in Thackerays losing their grip over Shiv Sena


2022-07-03

An odd thing about public perceptions in Madras of the time was that even though we blamed L.K. Advani for the mosque’s demolition, he was not seen as a menacing figure. Nor was the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), which was misunderstood as a fringe outfit that stood for quaint ideas like Hindu nationalism. It was Bal Thackeray who emerged as the Hindutva firebrand of the period, even though we knew he was a cartoonist once and we were never scared of cartoonists before. And it was his syndicate, named the Shiv Sena, and not the BJP, that showed what hate could do. Power, for example, could be achieved on a campaign of hate and grouses alone.

The Shiv Sena first came to prominence for organized violence against South Indian migrants whom Bal Thackeray cast as people who took away the jobs of Marathi-speaking locals, but he could not flog that issue for long. Then the destruction of the mosque in Ayodhya sparked riots in Mumbai, and Thackeray spoke publicly of Muslims in a way that politicians never did before. His insight was that most orators were boring because they gave sermons, but what was interesting was gossip. As he said in an interview, a lesson he learnt from his father was that an orator must “gossip with the people”.

At the beginning, Thackeray probably did not mean to become the figure he did. One of the finest analysis of his power came from Pritish Nandy, who told me, “At the start of his political career, he used to say things half in jest, and he used to be surprised at how seriously his words were taken. Slowly, he began to believe those things that he used to say in jest.” By the mid-90s, Thackeray held sway in Mumbai and other urban parts of Maharashtra. As a result, in 1995, the Shiv Sena formed a government for the first time.

That year, as a 21-year-old, I set out to work as a journalist in what was still called Bombay. I imagined I was going to a dangerous place and that inevitably I would be in some risky situations with the Shiv Sena. My first encounters, though, were absurd.

Days after landing in Bombay, I discovered that the Sena ran street gyms that cost just ₹20 or so per month. When I walked into one, half a dozen men on high-carb diets trying to look menacing found it amusing that a South Indian with a Christian name, who spoken no Marathi at all, would enter their den. They asked me to do 50 push-ups “for Hanuman”. And they gave me two pieces of cloth—one blue and one red—and said I could only visit the gym wearing these. It took me several days to figure out they were langots.

I lived in a chawl, in an area that was then a Sena stronghold, and I saw the life of an average Shiv Sainik. He was young and unemployed most days, tried to look menacing even to other Maharashtrians, and the only form of entertainment he could afford were the free street festivals his party organized that began with devotional songs and ended with the national anthem. From 1997 or so, the typical Shiv Sena carnival, at least in the Prabhadevi area, ended not with the national anthem, but with another song—Aqua’s Barbie Girl.

But my most absurd experience of the Sena was the first time I saw Bal Thackeray. It was a press conference in his home, Matoshree. I waited with many journalists, almost all of them from Marathi papers. There was an empty throne in front of us. Finally, he appeared.

After he sat, he stared at two journalists, both women, who were chatting among themselves. He kept looking at them, first in amusement, then in anger. I could understand. Even I thought it was odd. Here was a man of enormous power, and the two were just chatting. He scolded them for being disrespectful. He said, “Do you want to get home?” I do not know if he meant they would be escorted out. One of the women surely thought it was a threat. She yelled at him. This was my first acquaintance with the famed Bal Thackeray—a woman shouting at him and his looking helpless.

Despite its fame, the Sena was in reality a small party. It was Mumbai that was big, not the party. Actually, it remains a regional party even in Maharashtra. Though it has headed the state government thrice, all its terms have added up to less than eight years in power. It has attempted to contest elections in other states, where it has fared poorly. But anything that happens in Delhi, or in Mumbai, gets amplified by the media, and that is how the Sena has an outsized image.

Thackeray’s Shiv Sena, like other political parties, was useless to Mumbai. Neither the party nor Bal Thackeray had a vision for the city. Its people, including me, lived lives and commuted in a manner that were worse than what people had to endure in the rest of India. Intellectually austere journalists from Delhi used to hail Bombay for “its spirit”, by which they meant that no flood or terror attack could stop people from going to work. The fact is that people in the city go to work every day because their homes are worse than their offices. The Sena was among the forces that contributed to Mumbai’s decay, denying it its rightful place as one of the great megacities of the world. The Thackeray family’s loss of control over the Shiv Sena is not going to change anything about the party, but perhaps it is some kind of justice.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





Modi is right: College degrees are overrated


2022-07-10

We know that Indians have immense stamina for useless issues. But we may not have realized that it can often drown even the voice of Prime Minister Narendra Modi. This, when what he said was sensational. On Thursday in Varanasi he gave a speech to educators who had assembled to discuss the implementation of the National Educational Policy. He said that modern India’s education system “emerged from slavery”. And that it’s objective was petty. “The British, in their self-interest, set up a system of education that was meant to incubate a servant class.” He said very little has changed since the colonizers left. And that it was time India created more useful people than “degree-holders”.

Not having a college degree has been a stigma in India. As a result, many have faked their degrees even when they do not require such certificates in their lines of work. Modi himself has been accused of this. More amusing than politicians faking their degrees is the imagination of graduates that people who did not go to college should not hold important positions. As though being a graduate is an achievement, or proof of intellect or anything meaningful. Isn’t it the easiest thing to be if someone else is paying for it—to become a graduate? But the quest for college degrees is such a sacred Indian practice that politicians usually don’t scoff at it. Certainly a prime minister taking it down is unprecedented.

But is it true that India’s present education system emerged from a diabolic British plan to convert India’s brightest into unthinking clerks? Many Indians believe that Jawaharlal Nehru was the one who began the process of taming the middle-class by creating rewards for procuring certificates of higher education. But he himself may have been co-opted by the British in this sphere, just as he was by socialism and other religions of his time.

When I was reading, The Man Who knew Infinity, a biography of the mathematician Ramanujan by Robert Kanigel, I came across a piece of historical record, a comment by a British bureaucrat that gave a peep into how the British planned to control Indians. It was so dramatic that it sounded like one of those periodical hoaxes that patriots circulate on social media. But it was not a hoax. It was an authentic extract from a Report on Canara, Malabar and Ceded Districts by a British bureaucrat called William Thackeray (not the famous writer) in 1807: “It is very proper that in England, a good share of the produce of the earth should be appropriated to support certain families in affluence, to produce senators, sages and heroes… The leisure, independence and high ideals which the enjoyment of this rent affords has enabled them to raise Britain to pinnacles of glory. Long may they enjoy it. But in India that haughty spirit, independence and deep thought which the possession of great wealth sometimes gives ought to be suppressed. They are directly averse to our power and interest. The nature of things, the past experience of all governments, renders it unnecessary to enlarge on this subject. We do not want generals, statesmen and legislators; we want industrious husbandmen.”

As I am a Malayalee and have a cultural obligation to advertise what some colonizers thought of us, at least then, I am delighted to point out that Thackeray also says in the letter, “If we wanted restless and ambitious spirits there are enough of them in Malabar to supply the whole peninsula.”

The diabolic hope succeeded. The British suppressed “that haughty spirit” and created “industrious husbandmen”. This resulted in a Nehruvian elite and later a middle-class with that peculiar character—unremarkable group thinkers fearful of entrepreneurship. Not long ago, the forces that contributed to this were celebrated as Nehruvian virtues: an obsession with studies, not to be knowledgeable, but to find a job in an office. Nehru invested India’s meagre resources in higher education for the elite instead of universal primary education. This was his underrated flaw, write Jean Drèze and Amartya Sen in An Uncertain Glory.

The poor, who wish to make something of the lives of their children, are sucked into the powerful idea of education because they tend to imitate the rich, who encourage them through the careful use of compliments, reassured that education will only herd the poor into a hutch where the rich hold all the cards.

This is what creates that occasional ‘beautiful Indian story’—a poor man struggles all his life and spends all his money on the education of his daughter, who studies under the streetlight and then finally gets a degree. I used to know many children like this, on their way to degrees. Most of them struggled with what was called “academics”. As a result, they went through their childhoods being called stupid. They may even have believed it, even though they were probably very smart.

Modi’s pronouncement is significant in the context of his speech: a new education policy that will bring fields like carpentry, machine repair and plumbing into mainstream schooling for students who are interested in these activities. Also, one of the proposals is that college students will have the option to leave studies midway for a job and return to resume their hunt for a degree. This is humane, given that most Indians get a bad start in life and need to take care of themselves before they can educate themselves.

I wish this had happened decades ago. There were so many superb mechanics and athletes and artists who were made to feel dumb because they couldn’t quite understand a rhombus. Millions of childhoods, spent in pain, and wasted, because some people had a semi-literate idea of education.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





The insufferable fuss over Rishi Sunak’s Indian roots


2022-07-18

In the end, the waiter asks you about the meal and you say it was good. And he beams. I have never understood his glow. He behaves as though he cooked the meal. You may argue that his behaviour is a flicker of collective pride, a worker bee collecting an award for the hive. But that is nonsense, not because he probably hates his job, but because if you had instead told him the soup was disgusting, he would have said, “I’ll tell the chef.” No one takes a blow for the team, but everyone is big on collective pride.

This phenomenon is the underlying reason why I dread people who are said to be “of Indian origin” doing well, like achieving something big in an advanced economy. Naturally, then, I brace for the day Rishi Sunak becomes prime minister of the UK.

On that day, urban India will erupt in celebration. Indians will say, explicitly, that they are proud. But about what? There will be statements and allusions that there is something about Indians, which makes them beat others; something mysterious inside us that is potent outside India and evidently does not work in India.

But Sunak has very little to do with India. He was born in Southhampton. His parents were born in Africa. He has come so far in Britain because he is in a society where even conservatives, the very people who are meant to speak the minds of common people instead of pretending to be nice, do not discriminate between races. So he has done well because modern Britain is not like modern India.

Usually, emotions have logical underpinnings. Even collective emotions have reasons. But civilizational pride in foreigners “of Indian origin” has none. It is plainly absurd. When Sunak triumphs and Indians gloat, what exactly are we rejoicing? That we have good genes, like him? That we emerge from a special post-Africa race that can create leaders like him? That we created a global coaching class from where Sunak emerged? That all Indians have the innate capacity to become prime minister of Britain? This sentiment, of civilizational pride, is absurd for many reasons, but the funniest reason it is vacuous is that Sunak’s bid to lead Britain was made possible by a man named Boris Johnson, whose leadership is proof that a great civilization does not make all its members great. Johnson, the UK’s outgoing prime minister, had to quit because of incompetence and scandals.

When Venkataraman Ramakrishnan won the 2009 Nobel Prize in Chemistry, you can imagine the euphoria in India for a man who was born here but is identified as “British-American”. He felt assailed by the sudden pride of millions of Indians and rebuked them for being absurd. Also, there was a rumour that he had accepted a job offer made by an Indian institution. He not only denied it, he also said, “I can categorically state that if they did so, I would refuse immediately.” He then apparently felt bad and expressed regret for hurting Indians, who were merely desperate to feel proud.

Indians rejoice the triumph of their own, or those whom they imagine as their own, only in the West. We won’t get that ecstatic if a person “of Indian origin” rose in, say, Africa. True racists are those who feel inferior, not superior. Racism does not only in reside in insults and abuses, which are actually very banal, unremarkable and lacking in conviction. A more potent form of racism is in worship—like how resident Indians look up to the West. In return, the West does not spend much time thinking about India or Indians. So there is an unequal relationship between Westerners of Indian origin and their resident Indian admirers. Westerners of Indian origin do not appear to be as proud of India as India is of them, nor do they consider themselves Indians in the first place. But when it suits them, they do play the India card. For instance, every now and then, I would see a writer or academic “of Indian origin” make a decent living out of interpreting India, and even Asia, to the West. But if some Trump supporter asks him to “go back to your home country”, he would say that marvellous thing, “I was born in Houston.”

Also, in the face of an anti-immigration wave, like the one Donald Trump created, people of Indian origin attempt to include themselves among the destitute migrants. What their audience does not realize is that there is a difference between high-caste or wealthy Indian families that move to the West in search of prospects, and the African, Latin-American and middle-eastern poor who are often sneaked in. In a useful generalization, the typical US-bound Indian reaches there after a rigged race, as a consequence of his social equity or wealth, and therefore as a result of a big head start over most Indians. This migration is very different from what the West understands as migration.

Community pride is not always ridiculous. For instance, take the national pride generated by Olympic triumphs. What the people of a country are saying is that their nation invested and created systems that helped talented athletes realize their full potential. But, as this column has argued before, Indians are not in a position to claim even this form of pride. Indian athletes who succeed at an international level mostly do so because they have been trained in the West, or they are so extraordinary that even the Indian government could not ruin their chances.

Maybe, in our subterranean consciousness, we know that logical reasoning will deny us the sensation of collective pride; so we take care not to let reason interfere with our quest to appropriate a foreigner’s success as our own.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





What a school reunion reveals about people and pride


2022-07-24

For many years now, I have heard of reunions. On Thursday, I attended my first ever. My school classmates were meeting in Chennai. I would be seeing most of them after 30 years. When I opened the heavy door of the pub, I knew that the images of lithe adolescents in my head would be forever replaced by strange broad men. That happened, of course, but their personalities and so much else were intact. Character is probably something juvenile under an ageing camouflage.

And, contrary to what our teachers had prophesied about many of us, we had made it “in life”, and even thrived. Not only the bright, but everyone. Those who understood calculus, those who didn’t, and those whom the headmaster called “duffers” and “woolgatherers”, all of us made it. Or at least those of us who made it alive. Three did not make it. Two fatal heart attacks, and one fatal fall.

By the time I reached the twelfth standard, there were only 16 of us left in the class. Three deaths among 16 is a high mortality rate for a class that is only in its forties today. Or maybe it is a sign that mortality among the young is higher than people imagine. (This was what was demonstrated in the ‘Vyapam scam’. In that extraordinary phenomenon, thousands of officials in Madhya Pradesh were accused of taking bribes in return for helping candidates get high scores. When the investigations gathered force, we realized that dozens among the accused were dead or dying—in accidents or from disease. Journalists and activists felt that they were being bumped off by powerful politicians, but what I feel the case showed is that the mortality rate of Indians under 50 is higher than people expect.)

There is another high percentage when my generation is considered, but it is a happier statistic. It denotes the scale of emigration among the urban middle class. Most of the students who passed out of posh schools live outside India today, chiefly in the US. That is why this is a season for reunions. It is vacation time in the West, and people ‘of Indian origin’ are visiting India. A giveaway that my school was not a place where the social elite sent their boys, is the fact that the mortality rate and emigration rate of my class is the same.

Among my peers who had passed out of the finest schools, close to 100% live outside India today. Those days, a common topic in school debates was something called “brain drain—the notion that the migration of bright students out of India was a crisis. Today, I don’t think many of us believe that these expats, if they had stayed, would have made India a better place. This is because individual brilliance does not alter the fate of a nation. Actually, it turns out that their emigration was beneficial to India. Privileged Indians pulled themselves out of unfair competition with other Indians for jobs. This may be one of the reasons why some of my classmates from modest backgrounds survived and later thrived.

As we sat talking in the pub, it may have been obvious to anyone who was interested that we were all still from disparate social backgrounds. We were among the last of the Indians who came from all sorts of homes and places but did the same things—we watched the same films in the same theatres, watched the same serials, travelled in the same public buses and attended the same kind of schools. Today, Indians of all types don’t mingle easily anymore. In the schools where our children go, the social class is monolithic.

Most of my classmates not only remained in India, they stayed in the same pincode zone, or around. My generation apparently had two options—to flee and become cultural orphans in excellent orphanages or dig deeper into the cities that raised us. Both are ways of thriving.

My school was not very good even in my time, and we were there because the fee was low or good schools were too far. My classmates tell me that the school is far worse today. One of them said, “It’s like a government school now,” which in Chennai is the worst thing you can say about a school. But this is a feeling that even my peers who went to better schools get. That standards have fallen. They feel that way about their colleges, too. Once a friend said this about Chennai’s vaunted Indian Institute of Technology. They are not referring to ‘standards’ exactly. It’s a polite way of saying something else. When people visit their alma mater, they often feel it has become “downmarket”. They are referring not to the quality of education, but to the sort of students who are able to access their schools and colleges. They are mostly the poor or provincial.

Today, the rich have invented new islands, but the poor throng the old islands in their quest for prestige. But then, prestige is not merely belonging to a certain institution; it is belonging in a place that is unattainable to most. By thronging the old islands of prestige, the poor are eroding the very thing that they think they are attaining.

There is a bit of megalomania in a reunion. We go to hear the little stories all about us as told by people who were the last to like us unconditionally. Like you, I like listening to stories in which I am the hero. So I wonder why it was my first reunion. You may think that this was my first reunion because no one invited me before this instance. But I have a more persuasive explanation.

In my formative years, I never really attended prestigious places, and reunions were originally the megalomania of the elite, an invention of people who were very proud of where they emerged from. Others have caught on because people tend to imitate symptoms of prestige even when they have nothing to be proud of.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





How Aamir Khan nudges us to celebrate Forrest Gump


2022-07-31

We rarely hear people say, “The film was better than the book.” The only time I have heard this, sadly, was in reference to one of my novels. What we do hear often is, “The book was way better.” This is because people who say such things are an insufferable group called ‘book-lovers’. They are clearly people with a talent for reading, who think their ability is superior to more facile forms of entertainment. But another reason why not many rate a film above a book is more honourable. Almost always, a book precedes the film and there is something petty about rating a derivative above its source. However, there is a film that is so exquisite that it improves the novel it is based on in the very territory where a book is so formidable—in the writing.

A new film starring Aamir Khan, set for release on 11 August, gives me an opportunity to get your attention as I extol Forrest Gump, widely considered by filmmakers and ordinary people of two generations as one of the finest films ever. Written by Eric Roth and directed by Robert Zemeckis, it is based on a novel by Winston Groom.

The story is nothing, as stories usually are; merely a trick to lure people into ingesting the writer’s actual intention, which is almost never the story. A story is a delivery device, and what Forrest Gump delivers is the wisdom of the fool. It is a whole genre in storytelling—a slow person misunderstanding the sane, and in that way accidentally arriving at philosophical truths.

The novel, which was published in 1986, is on its surface the saga of a man who has a mental handicap as he fortuitously passes through big historical moments of America. It is told from the point of view of “an idiot”, as the protagonist describes himself. He clarifies, very early, “I am closer to being an imbecile or maybe even a moron, but personally, I’d rather think of myself as like a half-wit…”

The novel acknowledges how phoney it is for a writer who is not diagnosed as an “idiot”, especially not by himself, to pretend to understand the perspective of someone with such mental disabilities. Forrest himself has a list of famous “idiots” in literature who were unconvincing, and at one point says, “Mos of them writer fellers got it straight—cause their idiots always smarter than people give em credit for. Hell, I’d agree with that. Any idiot would. Hee hee.”

The novel establishes a loveable accidental philosopher from its very first page, but it is the film that elevates him to an unforgettable character by rewriting his lines. For example, the novel begins with, “Let me say this: bein a idiot is no box of chocolates.” In the film, Forrest seems to say something similar, but it is entirely different: “My momma always said, ‘Life is like a box of chocolates. You never know what you’re gonna get.’”

In another moment, a young woman visits her abandoned childhood home with Forrest by her side. She flings a stone at her home. And we can immediately sense that she may have been abused by her father when she was a little girl. She picks stones from the mud path and flings them all at the ruins of her home. Then she collapses. Gump tells us, “Sometimes I guess there just aren’t enough rocks.”

This is a plain fact from a fool’s point of view—that she ran out of stones to throw. But it is also a fact, in a heart-breaking way, about a person’s rage against a crime. There just aren’t enough rocks. Only one who does not think he is very clever can say this in such a powerful way.

Storytelling has the problem that science once had. Every remarkable truth has already been spoken. Every brilliant observation has already been made. There is nothing new left to say. There are only newer ways of saying old things. One way of speaking that modern storytelling uses well, which the world beyond fiction seems afraid to employ, is the endearing voice of the fool. In the real world, no one wants to be known as one. But this is actually an underestimation of the influence of a person who says wise things without being aware of his wisdom. The world is tired of people who think they are very smart. What the great fools of art, like Forrest Gump, suggest is that in many aspects of life, the world might be open to “an idiot” who bumbles into truths, making us congratulate ourselves for seeing the truth in the words of a simpleton.

The film creates new possibilities for the ‘philosopher fool’ beyond what the novel had envisaged. Forrest not only passes through US history, he also influences it. For instance, as a boy, when he had braces on his legs, he walks in a staggering way, which captivates one of the guests at his home—the young Elvis Presley, before he became a star. “Say, man, show me that crazy little walk you just did there. Slow it down some,” Presley tells the boy. The boy staggers, and that would go on to become one of the most recognizable dance forms in the world. This is not in the novel; it is a leap the film makes.

Never in the film does Tom Hanks, who plays Gump, try to look like someone with a deficiency. He does not make exaggerated faces. He doesn’t have to. When you consider this carefully, any person can pass off as similarly disabled. Just stare at people imagining that they have a mental problem; and they would appear so. Acting is not about making faces; acting is almost entirely speaking. And it is all incandescence when what’s spoken is already art in its written form.

Jenny: Do you ever dream, Forrest, about who you’re gonna be?

Forrest: Who I’m gonna be?

Forrest: Aren’t I going to be me?

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





Free speech warriors need freedom-from dud petitions


2022-08-07

The letter is addressed to Droupadi Murmu, who was sworn in as President of India in July, with the blessings of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), the very organisation the petition condemns. The petition asks President Murmu “to immediately release all wrongfully imprisoned writers and speak out forcefully to protect freedom of expression.”

To the request from PEN for my signature, I have written the following response:

Dear Liesl Gerntholtz,

I like PEN America, partly because they gave me an award once. However, I will not be signing your petition. Signing petitions is among the most useless things writers can do; far more useless than writing prologues and forewords. And, outside the West, this petition business is so silly that politicians find it more amusing than menacing.

Also, you should not give writers a facile option to mark themselves as good people, where they have to just sign a noble letter. By denying them the farce, the world would put pressure on them to do something meaningful instead.

I did not find anything wrong with the substance of the petition. It is true that the Indian government is using disproportionate force to quell dissent. Yet, I found it annoying. But then some reasonable things are annoying, like when a school teacher tells you how to raise your kids, or a gender studies professor tries to reform men. You may think what I am trying to say is that I found your mail sanctimonious. I did, but I am not against a bit of sanctimony in this world. How else can anyone say the right thing? The reason why your mail was annoying is that of late many of us in India have come to identify that pious Western tone with people whose humane views are a compensation for the ordinary evil inside them.

The American liberal establishment, from where many petitions to the developing world arise, is not exactly a standard-bearer of free speech. Most of you get offended easily. But then taking offence, like hypocrisy, is a fundamental right. It is what we do after taking offence that defines our class. And liberal intellectuals do destroy the careers of those who offended them. But then your point is that at least they don’t or can’t jail, maim or kill their foes. Governments can. In that light I grant that thin-skinned governments are far more dangerous than thin-skinned intellectuals. But then you try to solve a problem posed by thugs with solutions that work on intellectuals. Petition-signing, for instance.

Among the activists whom India has jailed or harassed, there are three kinds. The innocent; those who are in the grey area; and those who may have actually done something unlawful. Most of them have been incited, one way or the other, by American activism but they are not protected by American law or the heft of its extraordinary human rights edifice.

You might also like

Does RBI policy need the attention it gets?

Pelosi’s Taiwan visit presents an opportunity for India

How is tax calculated on sale of apartment?

India’s oldest wealth portal grew 7 times in two years

This is the structure of global activism: sitting in safe havens, Western activists incite people in other regions to seek the joy of revolt. Developing countries jail activists, and their handlers can’t liberate them. Years pass. Petitions are signed and sent to heads of state.

Freedom of expression is a marvellous invention. But Indians never had it for as long as I can remember. Many recent petitions make it look as though the BJP has brought an end to a free society. But we were never free. It is just that the harassment is more organized, orderly and certain today. It may appear that the Indian news media has considerable political liberty and that this freedom emerges from some Nehruvian imitation of Western ideals. It is a misconception. India’s media freedom emerged from a very practical and chaotic source— reporting of political campaigns. As politicians condemned each other, and the media quoted them, it appeared that journalism could take on the powerful.

Across the world, all sorts of freedom arose this way, through collective self-interest. For instance, America was able to abolish slave trade not only because it was the moral thing to do, but also because it made business sense for one camp to destroy the unfair business advantage (of cheap labour) of the other camp.

It is possible that political self-interest can bring American-grade freedom of expression to India one day. As the government becomes more and more authoritarian, I see our political parties, which are numerous and diverse, consolidate into a moral bloc and formalize freedom of expression—what an Indian citizen can do and cannot do, and what exactly constitutes war against the state. Already, the BJP’s overuse of a “sedition” law may have triggered the abolition of that obsolete piece of legislation.

But, before all that happens, if I am jailed by my government, I encourage you to get me the best lawyers, sabotage some Indian investments in America, and raise hell, as you did against Russia. Just don’t send out dud petitions.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’.

Elsewhere in Mint

In Opinion, Mythili Bhusnurmath says MPC is out on a wing and a prayer. Long Story has a cheeky take on the jargon of stock market.





How India’s middle-class came to be so patriotic


2022-08-15

I don’t know about India in its early years after independence, but I can tell you that in the 1980s, most Indians I came across were not patriots. People felt stronger about their religion, language and their castes, if they belonged to upper-caste communities, than about their Indianness. In fact, in all the jokes that involved men of various nationalities walking into a bar, the Indian was the biggest fool, unless there was a Pakistani.

We did not think very highly of ourselves. We were expected to ‘love’ India, somehow, and also flee India. It is not that we felt nothing. No doubt we wanted India to win a cricket match (though in Madras, you could not be sure of this when India played West Indies). On my part, I spent hours going through the pages of Encyclopaedia Britannica searching for a complimentary mention of India, or something more appealing than our antiquity.

One day, sometime in the 80s, during the convocation ceremony at the Indian Institute of Technology, the chief guest said, “Brain drain is better than brain in the drain.” The joke spread across Madras at the speed of sound, making us shake with laughter, pincode after pincode. Some of those guys who laughed then do not laugh at such jokes anymore. They have become patriots, who are probably people who do not laugh at themselves anymore. Today, most Indians across all classes are patriots.

You might also like

How Sapient Wealth’s Amit Bivalkar aced 14% returns

How NBFCs are wooing students heading abroad

What can put IRCTC stock on growth path

Rich-poor gap shows up in smartphone sales as well

How did this happen? It is not as though India became impressive in any special way. In fact, since the 80s, even though India has progressed, the Asian developing world has left us far behind. India continues to be a difficult place. The best thing money and success can buy is still a golden visa out of here. So what made us patriotic?

We can understand the process through four people all of us know.

One: that new non-resident Indian (NRI).

Two: that urban villager.

Three: that anti-Left guy.

Four: that defeated intellectual.

The first wave of modern Indian patriotism that was not a farce had emanated from the US in the late 90s. People of my generation felt this through their former classmates who had moved to America for education and had just started work there. Our first reaction was surprise, because these new patriots had shown no signs in school or college that they so loved their nation. The new NRI, we found out, had grown fiercely in love with his nation, religion, culture and language. He was radicalized in America by a society that did not deem him a member of its upper crust. Back in India, even though he was not rich, he had to just emerge from a certain home and he was guaranteed a degree of respect. But in the West, there was no such guarantee; there were days when he felt socially inferior to waiters and shop workers. This is the unsung force behind not only NRI nationalism, but also the migrant middle-class elite of many developing nations.

All this came to the surface during the Pokhran nuclear test of 1998—the way my peers in America reacted at first confused me. Guys who had never read a newspaper when they were in India spoke of the “strategic advantages” of a nuclear state, and girls who used to read J. Krishnamurthy and send postcards to villagers affected by the Narmada dam, rejoiced the manly power of a nuclear India.

Many of their peers who had stayed back in India, or who had returned to India to work for their families, did not feel so strongly—at least in 1998.

But that too changed soon with the rise of the urban villager. By this I mean a person who has the trappings of a big-city flaneur, who uses that daft expression ‘cosmopolitan’ for social diversity in urban spaces, but is in reality someone who finds comfort in social order, tradition, hierarchies, sects, home and also in contempt for formidable people who are different from him. In some ways, the second wave of patriotism was a middle-class Hindu response to a collective middle-class fear of Islam and its followers.

This force was widespread, but did not consume everyone. Even in 2003, when the Maharashtra government made it mandatory to play the National Anthem in cinema halls, one could sit in defiance as the sacred song played and not be assaulted by the public. The fever of patriotism was yet to infect all. But then, what Hindu nationalism could not complete was achieved by suave sanctimonious intellectuals, who sought to lament its power but ended up driving many who despised them to be their exact opposite. An unsung analysis of the modern world is that people tend to take the opposite positions of the public figures they despise. And so it has come to be that patriotism is today the virtue of Indians who are not very posh.

But the refined, too, have become patriotic today. They were the last to join. Some days, they even overcompensate by claiming some offence at something or claiming great joy at some feat.

The first time I met a person who truly loved his nation was a Sri Lankan refugee. This was in the 1980s, when his nation was being destroyed by a civil war. Maybe you have to lose your nation to love it somewhat. Or maybe patriotism was always only a form of mourning that the world misunderstood as adoration.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’

Elsewhere in Mint

In Opinion, Himanshu argues our problem is fiscal mismanagement and not freebies. Ajai Chowdhry writes on the superior power of the Indian mind. How good are BSNL’s chances of turning around? Vivek Kaul answers the question in Long Story.





Why modern science has largely been a disappointment


2022-08-21

People appear to be disappointed with many things, including love, religion, spectator sports and cinema, but not science. If they are asked what pursuit humans have excelled in, they may all say, ‘science’. Even other areas of exceptional human performance, like athletics, are attributed to ‘advances’ in science.

At first glance, science is impressive. It shows us spectacular images of galaxies; it claims to have photographed a black hole, and claims to know the origin of mass, and to have proof that gravity is a wave. And it is very hard for sick people to die anymore, because there is some magic medicine or a marvellous medical procedure. The word ‘scientist’ continues to evoke reverence, and gratitude. They just add ‘quantum’ to something and we grant that it must be important. And they just need to prefix their profession with ‘neuro’ and they can say anything about the mind as though they know what they’re talking about.

Despite all this shine, science has been a disappointment. It has been a disappointment in its contribution to our quality of life, in our understanding of the nature of physical reality, and of consciousness. The healthier you are, the more disappointing it is.

This is not an easy argument to make. When I say science is ‘disappointing’, what is it in relation to? Science has done exceeding well compared to many other professions. Take two of mine—journalism and literary fiction. Both have deteriorated. They have lost prestige and relevance. Middlebrow fiction has survived because of streaming, which is technological evolution, not artistic. Yes, science in 2022 is not as exciting as science fiction had predicted, but we should not hold science accountable to the fantasies of writers. In any case, good-natured science fantasy have been more prophetic than political dystopic fiction, like The Handmaid’s Tale, or the works of George Orwell, who got almost everything wrong, driven as he probably was by tuberculosis-induced gloom that generations of depressed intellectuals have misunderstood as political analysis.

So, science is disappointing as compared to what? Science is disappointing in comparison to its own reputation.

Consider a knee-replacement surgery. The knee is a simple joint. When the bones wear out, as it happens with old people, some parts are replaced with plastic or metal. Hospitals give the impression that the people who undergo this procedure acquire new knees. But the fact is that they just hobble less after the replacement. It is not as though the old can suddenly start jogging after they “replace” their knees. Even in fixing a simple joint like the knee, the medical field is far from imitating the power of the natural human body.

Modern medicine does not rejuvenate. It does not prolong life; it prolongs death. It may appear that science has helped people live longer; but the fact is that people are just dying later. Most old people have a poor quality of life for decades before they are finally allowed to go. I don’t know about you, but all this is not good enough for me. According to current science, my knees have only another three decades of running left. After that, I am expected to accept the poor quality life of an old man and a generally pointless existence. You may argue that within three decades a marvellous innovation will help me run forever, but science has been so bad at actual rejuvenation that I am very worried.

Also, science is unable to answer many simple questions clearly. For instance, is it good or bad to fast when you have a viral injection? Science does not know the answer to just about any reasonable question about fitness. A quest for clarity would be a journey through camps and cartels, all of them claiming various conclusions based on “the scientific process”.

Also, our understanding of the nature of reality has not changed significantly over the past hundred years since the Copenhagen Interpretation formalized the ideas of quantum mechanics, despite the investment of billions of dollars in large hadron colliders and the seeming discovery of many particles. Many exotic things that have been said in science are more speculative than people imagine. Our understanding of the universe, dimensions and time, too, has not changed significantly in decades. There is a hint of this in popular science.

Christopher Nolan’s Interstellar talks of the same cute sexy science that is mentioned in Carl Sagan’s Cosmos, which was published in 1980, in Stephen Hawking’s Brief History of Time, published in 1988. It would be absurd to say that there has been no progress in the past 50 years, and I do not suggest that at all. But I do say that the progress made has been rather modest. For instance, the James Webb telescope, launched last year, captures clearer images of galaxies than the Hubble, which was launched in 1990, but the Webb telescope is not the transformative machine Hubble was despite coming three decades later. Commercial air travel, too, has not become faster over the past 60 years. In fact, if we consider the demise of the Concorde, air travel has got slower for the rich.

You can argue that the Concorde’s failure suggests that it is not that we have not made advancements in science; it is just that those breakthroughs are yet to make commercial sense. Also, the modern tech industry has products that it cannot bring to the market for ethical reasons—like some forms of genetic engineering. But transformative technologies that are withheld for commercial or ethical reasons are very few. In general, we don’t have some things because we don’t know how to make those things.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’

In Opinion, Ashish Dhawan tells why Indian philanthropy is now poised to take off. Anirudh Suri writes what America’s Inflation Reduction Act means for India. In Long Story, an economist girlfriend explains why stock prices have rallied again.





No, the age of the Bollywood superstar is not over


2022-08-28

People don’t read books. They don’t read magazines, newspapers, or pay for their online subscriptions. They don’t visit restaurants as frequently as before. They don’t watch plays, comedy, art exhibitions, or Test cricket, or even a one-day match, or for that matter an entire T20 clash. Now, it appears, Indians don’t even go to watch Hindi films in the theatre. What exactly are people doing then with their lives? That is for another day.

Over the past several weeks, many Hindi films have bombed. They simply don’t lure their old base, which is most of India, to the halls, a feat that Marvel films manage. Many observers and theatre-owners blame the top rungs of “Bollywood” for this—that most superstars today have no talent; and that they nurture mediocre sidekicks who make duds.

The stars cannot blame their disgrace on the poor quality of their films. If they need great films to deliver hits, what is the point in being stars? The whole reason why they are paid tens of crores is that they claim to have the power to override the discernment of people. A power they do not seem to have anymore. Word-of-mouth can destroy their films. Taking all this into account, many observers say that the age of Bollywood superstars is over. But that is not true.

Film stars will endure, and even thrive. There can be no commercial cinema without stars. The force of capitalism may sack the present stars, but they will be replaced by similar people, maybe their ungifted but beautiful children.

You might also like

Sebi sees no bar in transfer of NDTV shares to Adani

When AI makes art, what can go wrong?

How bond market is luring India Inc away from banks

Will the RBI have the gumption to follow the Fed?

Stature is a strange thing—people grant it to a few, who then have power over all. Stature is like India. It’s an electoral democracy where most people make some people very powerful. But it is hard to invent an alternative to stature. Here are three reasons why a superstar exists in a capitalist system.

One, a star is compensation for the fact that no one knows how to sell anything. The best thing marketers have marketed is that they know what they are doing. The fact is that a small fraction of what people try to sell gets bought. It is very hard to sell because we really do not need most things. And a story without a hero is among the most difficult things to sell. The question, ‘what’s the story about’ has only one answer—the whole story. A synopsis of a story is among the dumbest things in the world. This is why a software feature that almost never works well on otherwise sophisticated platforms like Netflix is its prediction of what you may “like” based on what you have liked. People have a complex relationship with stories. It is easier to sell them a star.

Two, a commercial story should not be too good. It should not be many things that excite a good writer—it should not be unique, ground-breaking, complex, different or “push a new envelope”. Instead, it should be familiar, simple and derived from old stories. As a result, a good commercial story looks almost exactly like a bad commercial story. You can only tell the difference after the film’s release. Here, again, a bankable star is compensation for the impossibility of a bankable story.

Three, people need to form wrong opinions about some persons. In this way, people project their opinions on another person and fall in love with that person, not knowing they are only in love with their wrong opinions. Thus, a star exists. (Also why you should never meet a star you love.)

People who announce the demise of “Bollywood” stars point to the south and say that south India makes better films because they have better stars and as a result southern films are doing fine. But they overrate the south. South India does make a lot of terrible films, and, as in any movie business, most of them fail too. It may be true though that people in the south continue to flock to theatres. But this could be because, in terms of economy and economic behaviour, north Indian urban middle-class is a few years more advanced than southern. The point I am making is not only the fact that a typical multiplex ticket is more expensive in Delhi or Mumbai than, say, in Chennai. It is that the north Indian middle-class is less dependent on movie-watching for fun than South Indian. The failure of Bollywood, in fact, is an omen. Within ten years, southern stars too will begin to fail as though terrible films are a sudden development.

The failure of “Bollywood” stars is not in the reduced lure of Hindi cinema, but in their inability to drag people out of their homes. The experience of going to watch a film in India is more torture than entertainment. We have to survive the traffic, and the air, and the ugly chaos of parking.

Hindi cinema is no match for the new India where “development” has arrived. Then, of course, multiplexes take care of the rest of the torture. That bad food and ten minutes of advertisements and ten minutes of film trailers. The new stars, when they arrive, may not be able to draw Indians out the way that Amitabh Bachchan could, but they will still make millions watch movies.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’

Elsewhere in Mint

In Opinion, Nitin Pai argues why India needs a Nitipath for its civil services. Rajrishi Singhal writes double-speak can undermine India’s crusade at WTO. Long Story tells you which sectors in India are most amenable to reshoring.





Why Western compliments are so confusing for others


2022-09-04

There are public figures who are loved outside their nations more than within. Like Mikhail Gorbachev, the former leader of Soviet Union, who died in Moscow last Tuesday. The world, which is usually a reference to a region that is not one’s home, paid rich tributes to him while his homeland prepared for a modest funeral that would not be attended by its current president Vladimir Putin.

When a politician is loved more by foreigners than by his own people, does it mean that he is adored only by those who do not know enough? Or that the ‘global’ affection was meant to encourage him to go down a path that would favour foreigners at great cost to his own nation? We get more clarity when we don’t dwell on the nature of the politician, but on who these foreigners are that adore him.

It never so happens that a Russian or a Turk or a Syrian is first loved in Bolivia or India or South Africa. Or that Thailand gives a prize to an exceptional Brazilian. ‘International’ adoration emanates only from the West. When a person is loved more outside his nation, it means only one thing—that the West likes him.

The West is not only a bloc of nations in North America and Western Europe, but also a highly successful theology, with a sophisticated system of transmission. It has a monopoly over the idea of goodness, and also the capacity to transmit it across the world. And every now and then, the West extols a politician, activist or artist who has done something agreeable. What is extraordinary about most such tributes in the modern world is that the subject of Western adulation is almost always reviled by his or her own countrymen or not taken so seriously by them.

When Mikhail Gorbachev took over as the leader of the Soviet Union in 1988, he amplified the truth that the old communist experiment was a disaster and that the Russian economy was in poor health. He said that Russia had no choice but to reform—economically, by freeing public enterprise from government control, and also by freeing the voice of the people. He yearned for a truce with the West. But his economic policies, which seemed theoretically sound, created chaos in practice. At the same time, his attempt to create freedom of expression seemed to have succeeded and it brought about a great openness that exploded into rebellions. Several regions wanted to sever links from the failed state. Thus, an unintended consequence of his policies was the end of the Soviet Union. In 1990, he was awarded the West’s favourite backslap for good boys—the Nobel Peace Prize. A few months later, he was forced to resign as Soviet president.

I spoke to Ira Snissar, an ethnic Russian from Kazakhstan, a republic that gained independence from Russia in 1991. Snissar, who works in India’s non-profit sector, was born around the time when Gorbachev became leader of the Soviet Union, and her childhood was spent in years of turmoil—acute scarcities of what were until then basics, “the years of corruption and chaos and shootings on the road, and a time when nuclear scientists began to drive taxis”.

Before Gorbachev tried to make the world a better place, Snissar’s father was an engineer with a secure government job. In the years of uncertainty that Gorbachev unwittingly unleashed, he lost his job and had to figure out entrepreneurship. “He disliked Gorbachev,” Snissar says, “My father was not a communist ideologue by far, but he was proud of Russia and he blamed Gorbachev for ruining Russia. To us, the younger generation, we hardly spoke of Gorbachev. He was not such an important figure.”

So often, if we speak to the locals of a nation, we see that they see their historical figures very differently from how the West portrays them.

At first glance, it may appear that Mohandas Gandhi was an exception. His stardom in Britain was not contradicted in India. Yes, there were Indians who disliked him; he was even assassinated by one whose ideology has gone mainstream, but it would be hard to argue that Gandhi was reviled in India. He was loved in his time, and is loved as much today out of national habit. But the global consensus on Gandhi is a feature of his time. His stardom in Britain contributed to his rise in India, to his initial stature. A bit like how, years later, the Caucasian ethnicity of Mother Teresa was crucial to her legend. The fame of Gandhi is more a reflection of the power of Western transmission in a simpler time when information was controlled by a small elite. In a more democratic world, a Gandhi cannot happen—that is, a public figure who is adored by both the West and by his or her own people.

The principle works with hate too. There are politicians who are hated more outside their nations than within. In fact, some of these leaders are wildly popular in their home countries. They are also known as “strongmen”. And the foreigners who hate them are, at first, the West, who then transmit that hate across the world.

Before he attacked Ukraine, Russian president Vladimir Putin was a man who was hated more outside his nation than within. Now, it is unclear whether he has retained his popularity in Russia. The Burmese aristocrat, Aung San Suu kyi, was at first loved more in the Westernized world than in her own nation. Today, she is despised more in the West than in her own nation.

A global emotion, it appears, is always moral, with low stakes; a local emotion is always grey with high stakes.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





Time to admit India murders its own on the roads


2022-09-11

I am certain, though, that India does not wish to kill anyone. It is just that it does not care enough to make extraordinary changes.

You might also like

Fines for fake online reviews might be on way

Adani to shake up ACC and Ambuja Cement boards

The reality check of demat accounts crossing 100mn mark

Do banks recommend MFs on merit rather than commission?

A few days ago, the former chairman of Tata Sons, Cyrus Mistry, died in a road accident along with a friend. Authorities have since cited some reasons for their death, none of which was their fault—that the car’s driver lost control of it, that the two people who died were not wearing seat belts, and that the airbags may have failed to cushion them. India’s minister of road transport and highways, Nitin Gadkari, made an ambiguous admission of guilt when, during a public event, he said that he had succeeded in many aspects of highway-building, but safety was not one of them. What he likely meant was that thousands die or are badly injured everyday in accidents that are in part or entirely caused by poor road design and the absence of basic safety features that are common even in nations in Sri Lanka.

You would think it is difficult for a dignitary to die in a road accident in India because the country behaves as if the roads are meant only for them and the rest of us get to use them only because there are not so many important people. Yet, even they die. Gopinath Munde, a senior member of the Bharatiya Janata Party, was involved in at least two accidents, that too while he was travelling in a car with a red beacon. He lost his life in the second, in the heart of Delhi. Former President Zail Singh, too, died in a road accident.

Cyrus Mistry died on a stretch of National Highway 48 that was known to road officials and regular drivers as dangerous. It was a spot where a three-lane road tapered into a two-lane. India rarely warns drivers through meaningful signage of approaching danger. Also, Indians are conditioned not to take any message from the government seriously.

As Indians we have a high probability of dying on the road. Our children are at risk almost everyday. Yet, when we look at the matter objectively, we have a feeling that we cannot do anything about it. Road safety is largely an upper middle-class concern, and even in this segment, the concern never erupts into fury. So politicians do not live in fear of an Indian uprising against dangerous roads. In fact, “development” to most Indians is a type of road on which you can go dangerously fast.

The Indian justice system does not make it possible for citizens to claim substantial compensation for negligence. That would also result in chaos, as every kilometre of Indian road would bear evidence of some serious and dangerous lapse by an authority.

Also, citizens are not without blame. We are among the worst drivers in the world. We are addicts of civic disorder, and most Indians find rules stifling. Also, every time India has made an extraordinary reform, it has been only because it did not have any other choice. But accidents, by nature, are rare even in India. It only brings some lives to a halt, not all life. So India can continue without having to transform its roads.

In fact, Indian roads may get even more unsafe as India keeps improving them to increase speed, which improves the economy, but without making them safer through design and stringent enforcement of rules.

Don’t I have anything hopeful to say?

I can try. Circumstances could arise that may trigger a movement for at least Thailand-grade road safety. For instance, if several politicians were to lose their lives in a short span in unfortunate road accidents. Not a whole bus of them at once while they are being ferried to a resort, but in separate incidents. Politicians tend to exhibit empathy when other politicians die. After the death of Munde, who was in the backseat and not wearing a seat belt, the then health minister Harsh Vardhan said something that was unthinkable at the time—wear seat belts even if you are in the backseat. Eventually, Munde’s death did not change anything, but if there is a ceaseless reminder of how deadly Indian roads are even for politicians, maybe a political will would form.

Another phenomenon that can transform Indian roads might seem esoteric at first glance because it is dependent on a proper right-wing plot. But it is not impossible. The current political establishment at the Centre appears quite keen to suppress dissent. Yet, it does not recognize how important the idea of civic order is to subdue future public demonstrations. A society that is used to chaos on the roads would find it easier to create chaotic demonstrations that bring normal life to a standstill. So proper roads, sacred markings and a greater enforcement of rules would actually be a step towards exerting more control.

You may wonder if I prefer an authoritarian regime to unsafe roads. I am just seeding an idea to help bring in civic order. This won’t make demonstrations vanish; only make them more expensive.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’

Elsewhere in Mint

In Opinion, Nitin Pai tells fresh graduates to heed to Bombay Shaving Company CEO’s advice. Puja Mehra finds a trove of insights on getting India’s institutions future-ready. Long Story offers a survival guide for retail investors in a rough market.





The beauty of Roger Federer’s sport is a privilege of our life


2022-09-18

How lucky exactly were we to have him play for us? What grade of luck was he to us? I would say he was quite a bit more than paracetamol, and a notch less than our birth. Federer as a matter of generational luck is in the same category as the internet, vaccination and free speech. Especially for many of us who had grown bored of watching professional tennis by the turn of the millennium, when Roger Federer arrived and played the game in a manner that was at once new and old. Even his decline, over the past decade, was so beautiful to watch that we felt lucky to watch him lose, which always had a tragic quality to it. Not only because he wept, but also because in his decline was evidence of our own mortality, an omen of the inevitable. We are so full of ourselves that we mark our time in our greats. The sorrow we feel at the passing of the Federer era is not for him, but for our own decay.

You might also like

GST on crypto transactions in the works

Why your fuel bill hasn’t gone down yet

6 charts explain India’s motown revival

Renaissance’s Murarka recounts working with Jhunjhunwala

We are told that the world is “polarized” today, but the world mostly fights over facts, because facts tend to come out of untrustworthy mouths. On beauty, we all agree. When people say beauty is subjective, they are referring to something that is not beautiful. This is because we agree on actual beauty. On many abstract things, we always agree. The beauty of Roger Federer’s game is not disputed by reasonable people. He was great, of course, but it is not his mere greatness that made him so precious to millions around the world. Half a dozen people can be great in a sport in every generation, but not that many are aesthetic. Like Diego Maradona, Lionel Messi, Sachin Tendulkar, V.V.S. Laxman in cricket—and Roger Federer.

But what is the big deal about sporting aesthetics? In every other profession, the aesthetes are peripheral, unloved, sometimes even starving. But this is precisely why people go wild when they witness artistic beauty in sports—most people are not used to it outside sports. A sport is a mass spectacle that does not punish the occasional artist who stumbles in.

When we listen to Federer speak of his craft, he does not sound as esoteric as writers, including me, who try to explain his beauty. His grace appears to be an accident of his personality. Reading him, listening to him, I have never got the feeling that in his formative years he deliberately tried to look aesthetic. He only trained to play the game in the most efficient manner available to his arrangement of muscles, and it turned out to be beautiful.

Style, in sports, is strange. It is not a rebellion against the conventions of a game. It is the convention. A beautiful sprinter or a swimmer or a batsman, for example, is often doing what the theory of a sport had prophesied was the best way. And Federer was the triumph of theory on the tennis court. But his rivals were technically perfect too. There is no way you can play a sport at that level without technical perfection, but they never looked as good as he did when they played. Rafael Nadal’s two-handed forehand stroke never had the grace of a Federer moment, but it was highly effective, often more so. Every muscle of Nadal moved right for him to achieve that stroke; it simply did not require the inconvenience of beauty to achieve its end.

Elegance is extraneous to the dry objective of a sport, perhaps even a liability. All of Federer’s beauty on court emerges from the fact that he never holds the tennis racquet with both hands. Many others, if not all, do so because that is more efficient. At his peak as a player, Federer’s single-handed strokes never appeared to be a handicap, but I do wonder if Federer would have been an even better player if he had a few ugly efficiencies in his game as well.

In public perception, Federer’s artistry often eclipsed other important aspects of his game. For instance, he had a lot of power, and his serves were fast. But all his strength was couched in grace.

What is our obligation to Roger Federer? He would probably say we have done enough and he could not ask for more. His net worth at retirement is more than half a billion euros, partly because millions admire him enough to let him sell things to them. But do we still have an obligation to repay the gift of Federer? He is, after all, a privilege of life.

I think it is disgraceful that science, for all its shine, has let Federer down. In his goodbye note, what he said was that he tried to fix his body, which is 41 years old. He tried to fix it with surgery and other forms of modern medicine. But nothing that he could do, the millions of euros he was surely willing to spend, could heal the injuries he has accumulated over time and make him fit enough to compete with younger players at the highest level of the sport. I consider it yet another failure of science that in 2022, despite its glorious reputation as our finest achievement, it cannot mend the ailments Roger Federer.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’.

Elsewhere in Mint

In Opinion, Josep Borrell says the Kremlin would now find it impossible to turn the tide. Tulsi Jayakumar reveals the mantra to follow for start-ups amid financial uncertainty. Long Story profiles ex-SBI men who saved two banks.





We mustn’t underestimate the power of the second rung


2022-09-25

If King Charles III happens to kill someone, it would be a perfect murder. As long as the crime is committed in British territory, he has immunity from prosecution. The king is above the law, but this is among the trivial perks of the job. Beyond protecting himself, he has no power. The crown has survived but not its godlike power, especially for evil. We are accustomed to this, so we forget how unthinkable such a situation might have seemed to a medieval person. How did monarchy lose power? How did royalty, across the world, that could once behead a subject for being the faintest threat, lose power?

You may say this is explained in history. I don’t think so. The detail is there somewhere in the history of the world, but it is obscured by more famous and naive extrapolations.

The idea that some kings were reformers and that they reformed monarchy because they believed democracy was a better idea, is laughable. The more popular and respectable idea that now and then“people” revolted against monarchy across the world does not explain many things. For instance, why would monarchy allow a mass movement to grow so big?

The key to the mystery is in the fact that even powerful kings did not have absolute power. They needed financiers, administrators, experts—they needed aristocrats, the second rung of the elite. But this co-existence, which we see across world history, does not explain the end of monarchy. In fact, such a symbiotic relationship between the top two rungs would make monarchy even stronger, as the stability of the king is in the interest of aristocrats. Not just that, the well-being of the king would ensure one aristocrat does not upstage the rest (this aspect of human nature may also explain why the Gandhi family has survived for so long at the top of the Indian National Congress). And if a powerful aristocrat managed to become king, then he would be replacing one king with another. How can the power of the second rung then explain the end of monarchy? The answer is in the most effective and in many cases the only method the disenchanted aristocracy has to dethrone monarchy—by inventing a moral cause and then enlisting the poor to fight a proxy war.

Across the ages, all of activism is just this— the second rung of a society fighting against the top rung in the name of a public cause. A consequence of such a war is that aristocrats have to share some power with the masses.

On the origin of modern democracy, you can point to ancient Greece or ancient India, but that would be pointless because the full glory of monarchy followed that period. But there is an equally esoteric origin story that is set in the distant past. In 1215 CE, some barons rebelled against John, the King of England, and forced him to accept a contract written in Latin on a single sheet of sheepskin parchment. It was the Magna Carta, and when King John placed his seal on it, he was accepting that even a monarch would have to follow the law of the land.

To fix the king, the barons, the second rung of the elite, had to make their rebellion as moral as possible. So the Magna Carta says things that seem modern. Like the state will not punish a person until his guilt is proven; and the state will not seize land if the borrower has other ways of paying his debt. And, in peace time, “All merchants may enter or leave England unharmed and without fear…”

The Magna Carta did consider, explicitly, that people of “lower social standing”, women and Jews were lesser humans. That a document which wished to be moral would do this points to the fact that people are prisoners of their time. But it is also a hint that the objective of moral codes are never entirely about a generation’s quest for humanity; they are often tactics to beat a strongman.

A year after he was forced to accept the Magna Carta, King John cancelled it. In the centuries that followed, the document was forgotten for vast periods of time, and resurrected sometimes. Eventually, the British merchant class used it every time they had to ask monarchs to back off. By the 17th century, the idea of equality and fairness encoded in the Magna Carta helped landowning feudal lords to irreversibly diminish the monarchy in England. The price that British aristocrats had to pay for this victory was democracy.

We have been trained to think that in a revolution, ordinary people suddenly come out of their homes and overthrow a ruler. Yet, I cannot think of a revolution where this was the actual case. Even the French Revolution was not that simple. In every revolution, the second rung of the elite has used the broad idea of equality and fairness to trounce their oppressor. This is true even of the Indian freedom movement. Most of the icons of the Indian freedom movement were from the highest caste, but still a social rung below the British. We can frame the freedom movement as the aristocrat’s use of morality to mobilize the masses and defeat his oppressor.

We see the phenomenon at play today in all forms of activism. It is always moral, always for a better world, always a war of one rung of the elite against their oppressor, but fought through recruits. The aristocratic handlers of revolutions are often not charlatans. They may believe that they are not acting in their self-interest, but out of intelligent compassion. That is why they are so effective. Thus we have millionaires battling billionaires for a better world.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





What human nature has to do with rise of ‘far-right’


2022-10-02

In many nations across Europe, people are getting drawn to political parties that see generosity towards poor immigrants as a grandstanding virtue that is destroying the ethnic character of their nation.

Why is this happening? We are familiar with the phenomenon in India. We have seen it in the US. This is not a sudden change even in Europe. Intellectuals call it “the rise of the ‘far-right’,” by which they imply that a great evil is rising. They are, as usual, wrong. Not about the rise, but about the evil.

More reasonable intellectuals attribute the success of ‘the far right’, grudgingly, to “speaking what is on people’s mind”. It is an unintentional confession that ‘the left’ does not speak people’s mind. In that case, what is it doing in politics? And in literature and humanities, which are meant to be studies of human nature? What ‘the left’ is doing in these fields is giving sermons about what people ought to be. This character emerges from religion. ‘The left’ replaced religion as a way of speaking and took over that turf, which is why it enjoyed a great run. But now, because it does not speak what’s on people’s mind, and instead what an untrustworthy clergy preaches, it has become obsolete in many parts of the world.

You might also like

Jio will eye 5G enterprise business, not only consumer

Zee to shut channel to allay CCI concerns over Sony deal

How tokenization will change your online purchase

Matrimonial sites devise ways to beat dating apps

The charge of speaking “what is on people’s mind” carries within it a complaint that what is on people’s mind is not very decent. This is probably true. And that brings us to the strange nature of public articulation. There is a distinction between public articulation and speaking. In public articulation, most of human nature is not represented.

Let us say you have any of these views: you don’t like the visual appearance of Muslims; you don’t like the house help sharing your cutlery; you believe that some races are intellectually inferior to others; you think transgenders have a mental health problem. You can air these views if you have meaningful relationships. As the comedian Ali Wong said about the fortune of a good marriage, “…you get to go home and be racists together”.

Most people who hold any of these views, or even all of them, might still be decent people. Like you, or your parents. Sometimes decency is just about hiding your own indecent views. When such views are expressed in public articulation, the speaker looks very bad. Public articulation lays glorified emphasis not only a moral compass, but also uses an academic trick called substantiation. In fact, there is a wide perception that what cannot be substantiated is not worthy of respect. Yet, most views that most people hold dear have no substantiation. This is why I say that in public articulation, there is no space for most of human nature.

Unable to bear the suffocation, some people start saying what is on their minds, and a vast population then feels the shock of recognition; they love it. Speaking your mind is a risk; there could be either doom or great rewards for the risk-taker. The sanctimonious then attack them, perhaps to look good to their peers or compensate for their own moral limitations. They defame popular figures as “fascists, far-right, neo-nazis” and “new Trumps”. If you do not follow their theology, you are a “bigot”.

Of liberals, Meloni has said, “They attack national identity, they attack religious identity. They attack gender identity, they attack family identity… I can’t define myself as Italian, Christian, woman, mother. No. I must be citizen X, gender X, parent 1, parent 2.” After her success, a section of the Western press has called her a new Benito Mussolini, in part because when she was 19 she had professed admiration for the Italian strongman. The idea is to portray her as a ‘fascist’.

Labels are important for intellectuals, who are chiefly in the business of articulation. Labels are memes that contain whole ideas. I tried writing this column without using the term ‘far-right’ or any political labels, like ‘the left’ or ‘liberals’, and it was a struggle. The other reason intellectuals take labels seriously is that they emerge from a tradition of confusing thought experiments as material realities. Typically, a philosopher would think of an extreme scenario to clarify his own understanding of society, but in time, his peers would misconstrue the extreme scenario as a way of the world and then start lamenting human nature.

The intellectual aristocracy is of an overt and covert view that a majority of humans is “stupid”. As a result one of the worst analyses of contemporary intellectuals is the myth of “fake news”, the idea that misinformation has altered Western politics. In reality, the reverse is true. It is a changed population that has begun to make fake news succeed. People believe what they want to believe. The sanctimonious are articulate because they need to just say the right things. They are lauded by their own but are generally so annoying that they make most people deepen their pacts with private indecencies. As a result, the worst ambassadors of any idea are sermonizing intellectuals. In fact, that was what created a backlash against vaccination and climate change. Never has the world had a situation where humans hate sense because a group of learned people hold that view.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’

Elsewhere in Mint

In Opinion, Ankita Thakur says location data can boost enterprise in tier II and III cities. Andy Mukherjee says India’s internet policy mustn’t develop a Chinese character. Long Story explores the possibility of a smogless November this year.





The office is outmoded, but it will still survive


2022-10-09

For now, they are asking nicely. Except for Elon Musk. Across the West, and even in India, the top management is pleading with employees to return to physical office, at least three days a week. The era of ‘remote work’, they say, is over. In asking employees to return, the bosses are even explaining the concept of the office to them, chiefly the good bits. Apple’s Tim Cook wanted employees to return to work at least three days a week to restore “in-person collaboration”. Even US President Joe Biden pleaded with federal employees to return to their workplaces. Over the past few weeks, Indian tech companies used a respectful tone as they advised employees to return. Elon Musk has not been so nice about it. In June, he issued a memo that said remote work was no longer acceptable. “Anyone who wishes to do remote work must be in the office for a minimum (and I mean minimum) of 40 hours per week or depart Tesla. This is less than we ask of factory workers.” He also tweeted that those who “think coming into work is an antiquated concept… should pretend to work somewhere else.”

You might also like

Adani in talks with global investors to raise $10bn

Why Indian music apps are a let-down: 4 charts

GST profiteers return ₹500 crore to customers

Why banks are buying more g-secs than they have to

Yet there is a widespread belief today that the office is obsolete. This is not only the hope of many young executives, but also the fear of seasoned bosses.

But I believe the office will survive. It is even possible that the office will endure for many years.

Bosses tend to like offices. From there, affection for the office progressively decreases down the hierarchy. But, historically, bosses win, especially when they have a fair point. At most, they will have to throw money at the rebellion. Usually, freedom-seekers do not find freedom; instead they make slavery more lucrative.

Why do bosses like the office so much? On this matter, there are things they can say in public and things they cannot. Their reputable reasons are known. The ethical idea of ‘productivity’, for instance. They like offices because physical human meetings are hi-res and are the most efficient. Also, people marinating for hours in an office build stronger bonds with their colleagues. Everyone who has gone to work knows this is true, even in Indian offices where people waste a lot of time drinking tea and chatting. But, what the bosses also want to say but cannot is that most people do not like their jobs, they only do them because they have succumbed to the addiction of a monthly salary and will not be very productive if they are in a home environment. There is also something else that the bosses are not saying.

Bosses like the office because it reaffirms the fact that they are bosses. What is a king if he cannot see his kingdom? Freed of oppressors, bosses truly enjoy working in offices, and remote employees are an inconvenience that does not improve the boss-hood life of bosses in any way. So, bosses have good reasons to save the office.

Also, the popularity of remote work might be exaggerated by journalists and a type of creative techies who are drawn to the idea of freedom. It is possible that many people like to go to an office every day for various reasons that has nothing to do with work. In Mumbai, for instance, people have such terrible tiny homes that they would rather endure going to work against many odds, a phenomenon that some intellectuals have often misunderstood as “the spirit of Mumbai”. People also like going to offices to be liberated from spouses, parents, in-laws and children. And, people do enjoy meeting their colleagues and even pleasing their bosses.

Most people cannot handle loneliness for days on end, and remote work is exactly that. It is what writers, and other types of artists endure because there is no other efficient way of creating, and even they cannot take it. Some writers have tried to liberate themselves from the loneliness of writing by coming up with plans like the ‘writing lunch’, during which, they claim, they have lunch with friends and still write. This is not writing, it is having lunch. But the point is that even artists find it hard to work for days without meeting other people casually; like people who are less tiring than lovers and family, or just colleagues.

The obsolescence of the office is not new, from a purely technological point of view. Over the past two decades, the reasons why people should be physically present in an office every work day have lost their rigour. The idea of remote work itself is not new. The office, in fact, is a post-obsolescence triumph. Like representative democracy, which emerges from an ancient time when people in a locality had to elect a human to represent them and be heard in the capital. Today, we do not need a human representation; our voice can carry anywhere in the world. But obsolete things survive because modernity is just the name of an age, and people live in various eras.

Since the rise of the internet, the death of the office has been invoked now and then. About 16 years ago, after heavy rains in Mumbai trapped thousands of people for hours on roads and in vehicles, there were murmurs across the city about the antiquity of the office. Some companies seemed to have already taken the view seriously. A spokesperson of IBM India told me that hundreds of their executives were encouraged to work from home, and were given financial incentives to do so. But even then, bosses thought remote work was a euphemism for slacking. Even then, some people craved freedom from the workplace and others said they loved going to office. Since the time, the office not only survived, but thrived.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’

Elsewhere in Mint

In Opinion, Nitin Pai argues why Elon Musk’s “everything app” must be resisted. Rajrishi Singhal finds a common link between loan haircuts and freebies. Long Story asks: can a regulation for EV makers become a road bump?





Why we must adopt Ambedkar’s tactics in fighting foes


2022-10-16

In its first days, the anti-corruption movement was also a skit. The set, which was a raised platform that had a thin white mattress, was inspired by the freedom movement. The plot, too, of course, which was that one man would go on an indefinite fast and big crowds would come to watch. The leader of the movement, Anna Hazare, displayed some of the mannerisms of Gandhi, like the thoughtful tilt of his head. His lieutenants played their roles by crawling on to the stage to whisper things in the leader’s ear, as major figures of the freedom movement did to Gandhi. There was even a man on stage who looked dressed up like Swami Vivekananda.

At times, ordinary Indian life, too, is a skit. People unknowingly imitate actors from iconic cinema. In many video clips, drunk Indians, including upper-class women, who are threatening cops or security guards are actually hamming film scenes. Indians not only pantomime but also borrow the morals of historical figures and film classics. Gandhi’s technique of protesting authority, for instance, and his glorification of austerity have seeped into Indian life. But in the giant skit of modern Indian life, there is a historical figure who does not feature enough—B.R. Ambedkar. He is rarely imitated and his techniques of fighting stronger foes are almost never used by Indians.

It is true that his fame has grown since his death because the power of upper castes in deciding whom Indians should adore has receded. In fact, this month, yet another book about him was released. In Ambedkar: A Life author Shashi Tharoor points out that today only Gandhi statues outnumber those of Ambedkar. “A measure of his stature is that his and Gandhi’s are the only two statues on the grounds in front of Parliament.” But modern India’s tribute to Ambedkar is more decorum, perhaps even an apology to the way India tormented him throughout his life. No one thinks of Ambedkar in terms of life hacks, but his story is full of them. And we have squandered them all these years by merely worshipping him.

His most important method of fighting, an umbrella strategy that accommodates other techniques, is this: in a fight against a formidable foe, align with another formidable force. Then promote your ally as the future, improved version of your foe.

The Hindu religion made Ambedkar “an untouchable”, an expression that he used freely to describe himself, though modern upper-caste people tend to display a certain proxy-sensitivity to the term. Ambedkar did not just relinquish the Hindu religion, he aligned with an equally formidable force—Hindu culture. He made a show of considering a conversion to Christianity, Islam or Sikhism and then rejecting them because he was not convinced they were any better than the Hindu religion. In the end, the leader chose Buddhism because it was Hinduism without all its wounds. “Buddhism was,” Tharoor writes, “a kind of Hindu Protestantism.”

In other spheres, too, Ambedkar used the strategy of countering foes with formidable but modern forces. He countered Hindu practices by invoking the finest insights of the West. To him, Westernisation was not a form of subjugation to a dominant culture, but a way of punishing ancient India. Also, he countered the political clout of north Indians and Hindi by pushing for English as the single language that can unite the whole nation. For the same reason, he also overrated south India: “There is a vast difference between the North and the South. The North is conservative. The South is progressive. The North is superstitious, the South is rational. The South is educationally forward, the North is educationally backward. The culture of the South is modern. The culture of the North is ancient.”

Maybe he did not know enough about the South, but this view suited him in neutralizing the power of his political rivals.

He took on Gandhi. We are often told they had “ideological differences”, which is another way of saying nothing. Historians can be lame transmitters of human psychology. It seems more probable that Ambedkar’s disenchantment with Gandhi had something to do with a turf battle. Gandhi, an upper-caste male, was India’s most influential social reformer but he had endured none of the indignities of being “an untouchable”. Imagine if the country’s most influential feminist were a man. Whatever the reason for their friction, Ambedkar countered Gandhi too by aligning with forces that were as formidable as Gandhi, but futuristic. It was not a person, as no one else back then could match Gandhi’s stature. So Ambedkar aligned with the great moral idea of the modern city. He dismissed Gandhi’s romance of the village and the idea that the unit of governance had to be the village. In fact, Ambedkar said that the Indian village was the fountainhead of India’s social cruelties. Also, to counter the influence of Gandhi, Ambedkar aligned with another modern force: the Indian Constitution.

Ambedkar said that India would be at risk of losing its independence again if Gandhian tactics of protest through civil disobedience were allowed to continue in free India. Once freedom had been won, Ambedkar said, everyone had to follow the law. He dismissed Gandhian protests as “the grammar of anarchy”. Yet, in Indian politics, it is this grammar that has emerged as the primary technique.

Why Gandhi is pantomimed more than Ambedkar might have very little to do with their castes, and more to do with what is easy.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





When activists look like pawns in a war against Meta


2022-10-23

The Wire, a website that identifies as a news portal, was a victim of a prank this month. It appears that someone or some group made up a story that some activists in India are conditioned to buy—that the social media giant Meta, formerly known as Facebook Inc, is in cahoots with the Indian government. And sold this lemon to The Wire. Some argue that the website was not a victim at all, and that it fabricated the story to attract more people to donate money to its efforts to end a right-wing regime in India. I simply do not believe that. Indian activists tend to be simpletons, not frauds.

What happened was that The Wire ran some “investigative” stories that claimed Meta, which owns Instagram, had given special privileges to Amit Malaviya, head of the social media cell of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party, to take down Instagram posts that he didn’t like. The reports said this information was given to it by a source inside Meta.

The premise is so silly that it would have been a red flag to any professional news desk. But this is the type of conspiracy that activists easily believe. To support its story, The Wire quoted an email of a senior functionary of Meta, which turned out to be fabricated. Other back-ups of the story were fabrications too. Thus, yet another sanctimonious organization that lamented “fake news” was itself a transmitter of it. No Nobel for you.

Meta is a low-hanging fruit for a type of activists across the world. How Meta became the arch-villain of our times has a definite origin story that is very different from the traditional reasons why giant corporations are despised by people who claim to have something called empathy. The aversion to Meta, however, has nothing to do with empathy.

The Western media, which still holds extraordinary influence over how the world must think of politics, books, films, food and animals, is yet to forgive Facebook for democratizing opinion. “Social media gives legions of idiots the right to speak when they once only spoke at a bar after a glass of wine, without harming the community… but now they have the same right to speak as a Nobel Prize winner. It’s the invasion of the idiots,” said the writer Umberto Eco, who has won a Nobel, of course. Not many in the Western intellectual establishment would put it this way in public, but it is probably what they believe—that only some people are qualified to transmit opinions. In any case, social media diminished the financial power and social prestige of the Western intellectual system, and Facebook was the mascot of this accidental revolution.

Hostility to Facebook has made the Western media come up with its worst analysis of human society—that fake news makes right-wing parties win elections. The fact is the inverse. The popularity of the right-wing and its strongmen makes a piece of fake news travel more than news that does not favour them. Very simply, fake news that is not popular will not travel.

The Western mainstream media has successfully created a perception that Meta is an unethical, intrusive corporation. Indian activists , including “investigative journalists” who derive their moral direction from the West and prestige from Western approval, have become foot soldiers in what is a class war between the old elite of information and a corporation that ended their clout.

A few months ago, an organization called The Reporters’ Collective published a short series of “investigative” stories that argued, among other things, that Facebook was kinder to the BJP’s fake news system than the Congress party’s equivalent by shutting down more Congress proxy pages with spurious news than BJP proxies. But the evidence was sketchy. Also, the website claimed in one of its headlines, “Facebook charged BJP less for India election ads than others”. But the fact is that Facebook’s algorithm rewards popular ads by making it cheaper per impression or link click. So the fact that the BJP’s ads were cheaper than the Congress’s was because the BJP is more popular than the Congress.

One piece of circumstantial evidence for the shoddy nature of many of these activist efforts is that they are usually not picked up by respectable American newspapers that would like to see Facebook’s reputation suffer but not at the cost of their own reputations. That an American social media giant colluded with a political party in India to help it win an election would be the sort of story the mainstream American media would love. Yet, The New York Times, and other major US papers, did not seem to take these reports seriously. The stories were carried by Al Jazeera.

Facebook has for long brought out the worst in Indian activists as they unwittingly became pawns in a sophisticated battle that is underway. A few years ago, when Facebook wanted to offer free but limited internet connections to the poor, activists sabotaged the effort, citing the abstract theology that the internet should be all-or-nothing. There have also been campaigns against the user conditions of Facebook’s apps that are full of invective.

There was a time when only corporations and the rich could advertise their products. Today, because of social media, small companies can reach consumers directly by spending less than a few hundred rupees a day. Also, Meta has been eliminating powerful middlemen who stand between artists and you. Much of what such activists defame are actually things that are more useful to us than their activism. Like Meta itself.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





Why Rishi Sunak is an ideal ambassador of Hinduism


2022-10-30

Probably for the first time since the birth of global perceptions, the image of Hinduism, like that of Islam, can be said to have suffered on account of the actions of its followers. Indians claiming to act on behalf of Hindus have acquired the reputation of tormenting people from other communities and even their own from other castes. Frequently, Hindus are wrongly seen as conducting “a genocide” against Muslims and correctly perceived as rewarding politicians who have made India a minor hell for that minority group. Once, the meandering cow on Indian streets was merely material for foreign correspondents who wanted to be amusing, but today the cow is a brooding foreshadow of lynchings. Modern India appears to the world as a place where Hindus have a low bar for quality of life but very specific views about the school uniforms of Muslim girls and what others should eat; a place where even a progressive politician like Arvind Kejriwal, whose schooling policy is celebrated in The New York Times, demands images of deities on currency notes. And where people spend a lot of energy on claims that an old mosque was once a temple.

You might also like

India’s highways beckon retail investors

After Musk takeover, what’s next for Twitter?

What are bank credit growth figures telling us?

What will it take for the SBI Cards stock to recover?

We are observed in this manner by whom? Is it only by some people in the West who track international news? Isn’t most of the world ignorant of others? And if most people are religious and conservative, wouldn’t they be more considerate to Hindu assertion? No, not necessarily. As this column has argued before, there is no such thing as a global right-wing. People are practical only at home; when it comes to other regions, everyone is a ‘humanitarian’, as it costs nothing to be so.

As a group, Hindus of Indian origin in the West are good ambassadors of India, usually, but not of modern Hinduism. Their success is secular and their grouse is religious. For instance, in America Hindus are often seen as overt and covert supporters of a muscular Hinduism back home. In the UK, recently, after a cricket match, British Hindus clashed with local Muslims. Meanwhile, articulate Muslims in the West are beginning to portray muscular Hinduism as a global villain on par with fanatical Islam.

It is in these circumstances that some help has arrived for that new global reputation of Hindus in the unexpected form of a new British prime minister. Rishi Sunak is an Englishman. He speaks like one, but is of Indian descent. His Indian links might seem convoluted, but what is beyond dispute is that he is Hindu. Sunak is seen as Hindu in a way that a Salman Rushdie or Javed Akhtar isn’t seen as Muslim. Sunak is not an amateur Hindu. As he has conveyed, he is a practising Hindu. He is a temple-goer. He lights diyas, which even many devout Hindus do not. He took an oath recently with his hand placed on the Bhagawat Gita.“I am now a citizen of Britain. But my religion is Hindu,” he has said, “My religious and cultural heritage is Indian. I proudly say that I am a Hindu and my identity is also a Hindu.”

Sunak says modern things, reassuring things, and he is suave, a feature that most people find impressive if the person is not saying anything uncomfortable. Like most men with a side hair parting, Sunak looks dependable. During his campaign to head his Conservative Party, perhaps to reassure people that his Hinduness should not worry them needlessly, he tweeted this: “My constituency is home to hundreds of beef and lamb farmers and I am committed to supporting the fantastic industry they represent. People’s food choices are their own. I would lead a government that champions our livestock farmers at home and abroad.”

Sunak will find himself the brand ambassador of not just global Hinduism. He is also claimed by Britain as an ambassador of one of its peculiar self-compliments—its diversity. When Britain celebrates its ‘multi-cultural’ character, it usually means that a gregarious migrant has the mike, or that it is so reassured of the dominance of one ethnic group that it allows others to thrive—as long as they are ‘multi-cultural’ only in appearance, and under the hood are very British. Sunak is a Briton, even if he looks a bit different from the dominant ethnic type. But his Hindu identity is not a farce.

Hinduism allows Sunak to be anything, to say anything, and still be a ‘practising Hindu’. Nothing he does or say can disqualify him as a Hindu, for there are no disqualifications in the faith and nothing is heretical. He need not even believe in God to be considered Hindu, as atheistic traditions have long existed within Hinduism. Even B.R. Ambedkar, who converted to Buddhism, adhered to what he called “the Hindu culture”. Sunak seems to have taken fine aspects of the Hindu religion and culture and conflated them.

Modern political Hinduism in India has started dictating how non-Hindus should conduct themselves, but outside India, Hinduism is broadly still seen as an endearing if quaint cultural force as always. Sunak represents this Hinduism of festivities, which is different from the Hinduism of mysticism, the faith’s image the last time it was popular around the world—in the 1960s, when people from the West who had a void within, or some drug, popularized the myth that only Hinduism had all the spiritual answers.

Sunak’s version of Hinduism might not impress some Hindus in India, but it is clearly a more authentic version of the great ancient faith than the mystical exaggerations of hippies and of the muscular hyper-emotional Hinduism that looks set to remain a feature of Indian politics for a long time.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’.

Elsewhere in Mint

In Opinion, data analysis by Jayati Sharma & Sahil Deo shows India has gained stature at the US. Sandipan Deb tells why Europe’s “garden” is under a severe attack of blight. Long Story predicts the future of the present energy crisis.





What will finally save us from toxic air isn’t democracy


2022-11-06

It is that time of the year when toxic smog makes it hard to see the faces of the rich and sophisticated in the national capital region, but I can assure you they look like losers for having to live here. Every November, they reconsider buying that Maltese citizenship, or that villa in Goa for the same price; and they secretly or overtly despise their spouses who are stuck here for emotional or professional reasons. Of the millions of rupees they pay every year to live in Delhi, on their home in a fortified enclave, the school of their children, their club, their cars and the restaurants they frequent, a major portion is not for the quality of services, but simply to keep real India out. Yet, it is hard to keep real India out of their citadels, especially when seasonal wind patterns ensure that north India’s vehicular, industrial and agricultural pollution does not blow away and instead fills the lungs of hundreds of millions, damaging many in irreparable ways.

You might also like

Tweak in IBC to turn sick firms around faster

Adani plans retail bond sale worth ₹2,000 crore

What gives TVS an edge over Hero?

Titan sparkles, but stock remains pricey

Winter pollution has been bad the past few years except during the pandemic reprieve when the air was fresh and crisp. India has been unable to solve the problem because Indian politicians do not have an incentive to provide clean air. In fact, every important aspect of Indian politics contributes to the smog, including the Aam Aadmi Party, which through its pampering of polluting farmers implies that its promise was only “a clean government”, not clean air. As a result, the way to clean north India’s winter air lies outside the democratic process. But how?

The smog in Delhi is caused by emissions from vehicles, industries and the burning of paddy stubble by farmers in northern states, especially Punjab. Farmers burn the stubble because it is the cheapest way to get rid of it, even though it is the most harmful way. Last year, there was much lament about air quality; committees were set up and the right things were said by politicians and bureaucrats. Evidently, nothing has worked. This year, stubble-burning in Punjab has increased. Farmers, often regarded as sacred beings, especially among people who do not know them, and who are often referred to as “the hands that feed us”, have successfully protested against government action against farm fires. They are demanding compensation to adopt cleaner practices. Until then, they will be the hands that choke us.

Devotees of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party have made it seem as if stubble-burning is the only reason Delhi is choking. That is not true. It is a joint effort of many aspects of Indian life.

A few years ago, Beijing faced a similar problem. It had become one of the most polluted places on earth. The Chinese government has greatly improved the air quality in Beijing, which is far cleaner than Delhi today. How is it that a Chinese government that is called autocratic, usually in a bad way, is more humane than the Indian government? It is not just that Chinese methods are more efficient than Indian. It is that political incompetence is protected by democracy. As long as politicians can win elections, they need not actually do any good. And the central premise of democracy, that people vote for ethical causes, has turned out to be nonsense. Also, the average Indian voter does not care at all about air quality. In this way, Indian democracy is the revenge of the poor. Equality in India is not improving the lives of the poor, but worsening the lives of the rich.

India is only an electoral democracy; otherwise, it is a plutocracy of elected guys. A silver lining is that unlike corruption and anarchy, politicians don’t stand to gain from pollution. So they do wish the problem did not exist. Maybe some of them even have half a mind to solve it. But they are too inept and callous to find effective solutions. They know that elections in India are not decided by air quality. In any case, it is a seasonal phenomenon, and Indians forget the smog the moment it clears. Also, even the upper classes have low standards for health. Poor air quality, whose consequences for life are not very visible, unlike covid cremations, is certainly not worth antagonizing voters like the oh-so-sacred farmers.

The solution to the toxic winter smog has to come from outside the democratic process. This is not impossible. We often lament how bad our governance is; but a more interesting question is why do good things happen?

I can see three ways in which north India can solve winter pollution. None of these requires the inconvenience of human goodness. Nor does it require the practical mechanism of electoral democracy. But each of them needs the cooperation of politicians.

One, the self-interest of old men. I have a theory that one of the reasons why many nations enforced autocratic lockdowns during the pandemic is that old men were at the greatest risk, and old men either run most of the world or are influential in other ways. Pollution, too, is most likely to kill the older lot first. As awareness around the long effects of smog on weak lungs grows, the fellowship of old Indian politicians may find the will to solve the problem.

Two, a farsighted influential politician who realizes that politicians stand to make many times more money in a liveable prospering country might get aggressive about improving living standards. This is funny only because truth has that quality.

Three, the nationalism of shame. I am a big believer in this. Historically, nationalism begins as pride, but eventually becomes more sophisticated and real, and people who have high stakes in a region will feel strongly ashamed of its flaws. Shame is a form of intelligence, and I wish it upon us.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’.

Elsewhere in Mint

In Opinion, Nitin Pai tells how we should confront the global ‘polycrisis’. Aditya Sinha and Chirag Dudani write how to make states face consequences of their fiscal misadventures. Long Story exposes the governance challenge at MCX.





Why T20 triumphs over intellectuals and purists


2022-11-13

However, the loss may still hurt a bit, and since Thursday, when India lost to England in a semi-final of the T20 World Cup, Indians have come up with various consolations. The comedian Tanmay Bhat tweeted, “test cricket is real cricket”. It was also a jibe at a type of serious men who keep saying this.

The fact is that today the predominant version of cricket is the 20-over version. Cricket is T20. It has eclipsed even the one-day game. In what, you may ask, if you are of the serious type. And I would say, “in the only thing that matters in sports—in popularity.” What about prestige, you may ask. Prestige itself is not so prestigious anymore.

You might also like

Adani eyes stake in Bengaluru airport

The Android of smart home ecosystems is here

Why Mahindra & Mahindra is hitching a tractor ride

Never mind Sept quarter blip, Trent looks good

Test cricket is, of course, the most sacred form of cricket, but it is like most sacred things—there is a broad consensus on its sacred nature, but no one can say why, nor is there any deep emotion underpinning its sacredness. Most people who love cricket do not watch Test cricket anymore, even though they may track match updates. It is more event than sport. They do not even watch an entire one-day match as they used to before. In fact, if it were not for the 20-over version, cricket would have stagnated or even shrunk in a distracted world filled with addictive frivolities where even Hindi films struggle to lure fans into theatres.

T20 has made cricket prosperous and deepened the love of its fans. It is in the natural order of things then that its birth was difficult. It was considered abhorrent by the sort of people who are very sure about what is abhorrent.

T20 was born of a local necessity in England, where the young found domestic cricket boring, chiefly because it was. A marketing manager with The England and Wales Cricket Board, Stuart Robertson, suggested that a 20-over version of the sport will draw people in. It was not received well. Seven of the 18 country chairmen voted against it, and so the decision passed narrowly. Many major cricketers and writers scoffed at the idea. But, eventually T20 stormed the cricketing world, aided by the Indian Premier League (IPL).

I was among the people who were certain the IPL would be a failure, but in my defence I must say that my reasoning was not that it was an inferior sport, but that for decades Indians had neglected domestic sports because they were not really sports-lovers; rather, they were looking for national pride and watched only international cricket. So, I wondered, why would they watch a 20-over version of domestic cricket?

The triumph of T20 is a triumph against intellectuals and purists. One-Day Internationals themselves had faced similar resistance at various stages of the format’s evolution—when floodlights were introduced, when the red ball was replaced by white, and when cricket whites were replaced by coloured clothes. Purists called it “pyjama cricket”, a term that percolated down layers of society and inevitably infected pretenders.

In any field, purists are usually a section of old-money folks who also generally had good childhoods, and hence have reasons to love and imitate the world of their parents. Their considerable influence in media then influences middle-class pretenders. The third type of purists are players who are direct beneficiaries of a particular tradition. Like Sunil Gavaskar has reason to consider the straight bat superior to the helicopter shot. There was a time when fine Test batsmen considered the reverse sweep a quaint sacrilege.

In every sphere of human life, there are these three types of purists who appear to uphold a sacred antiquity. They existed in the publishing industry, and they scoffed at Amazon’s claim that it can sell books online. They were in the film industry, scoffing at Netflix’s vision of cinema that did not require movie theatres. Not very long ago, when a Netflix film would be screened at an international festival, purists used to boo.

In any given sphere, purists drive a way of the old life to ruin until delinquent capitalists who are not in awe of tradition create something new to save the old. They are insulted by the purists as crass entertaining clowns. Then the honest masses who have not read enough to pretend to be other people make that innovation a huge success. So the purists lose, grumble and eventually accept the change.

I must confess that by far my happiest memories of cricket were at dawns in December and January when I would be up in Mumbai watching live telecasts of a Test series in Australia. I didn’t care if India played. It was a beautiful spectacle that did not require the menace of meaning or thrill.

So, I do not suggest that what purists try to save is useless. But what they resist and what they insult is often precious.

Tradition survives by glorifying abstract things. For instance, the central flaw in the consecration of Test cricket—that it is a true test of the calibre of a batter. It is absurd that this hypothesis has survived for so long because Test cricket is filled with great stonewallers whose mediocrity is exposed in other formats. A batsman needs to be more gifted to perform well in T20 than in Test matches. It is easy for mediocrity to survive in Test cricket because the fewer strokes you have, the fewer risks you would take and the longer you last.

Endurance, in all walks of life, is nature’s reward for ordinariness.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’.Elsewhere in Mint

In Opinion, Vivan Sharan writes on the lessons for India from the FTX saga. Barry Eichengreen explains the trilemma of CBDCs. Long Story reveals how the Chinese use Indians as fronts for scams.





How hypermorality nearly brought Twitter to ruin


2022-11-20

Some failures look a lot like triumphs to me. Twitter, for instance. The company claims nearly 240 million active users. Most don’t pay anything to be users, but the company drew revenue of about $5 billion in 2021, mostly through advertisements, which is two-and-a-half times what The New York Times Company earned in that period, and a 35% jump over its 2020 figure. And Twitter does not spend a cent on war correspondents and other kinds of journalists, or on writers, artists and editors, or any sort of content for that matter. At this point in the story, Twitter looks like a colossal success to me.

But Twitter, incredibly, loses money. Its new owner Elon Musk has said the company loses $4 million a day, chiefly on expensive American engineers. It is like a newspaper that does not spend a cent on journalists or news, and makes billions on advertising, but still manages to lose money because it uses very expensive paper.

There is something absurd about this. Since taking over this month, Musk has sacked half of Twitter’s employees. Maybe what he needs to do, to completely eliminate losses, is outsource most of the engineering to India; he may get rid of losses. Instead, Musk has been hinting that the prospects are bleak for Twitter. He tweeted, “How do you make a small fortune in social media? Start out with a large one.”

Musk has been mulling over a bad idea to make money, a plan that involves asking users to pay for an overrated element on Twitter called a “blue tick”, which is actually a white tick on a blue background. While such users are promised fewer ads, this plan is erroneously called “subscription”, and even more erroneously compared with You Tube’s premium subscription, which lets users watch advertisement-free content. In contrast, Twitter expects to charge its popular creators of content to perform.

One of the most difficult things in the world is to get people to spend, even on what they like. At the same time, people splurge on what they may not enjoy but are compelled to buy. People think hard when they have to pay ₹799 for a book they know they would like, but they will spend more on third-rate food and sugary water in a multiplex. I have no quarrel with them, I am only arriving at the nature of economic behaviour that hurts journalism and dooms any attempt by social media to get users to pay. People will not pay to be on social media, and that is all there is to it. It is a product they need if it’s free, and a product that is useless if they have to pay for it. The very reason social media came to be was that it was free, and it forced journalism and entertainment, in the beginning, to become free.

Twitter does not need the absurdity of asking even its popular creators to pay. The problem with Twitter is that right from the start, it had grandstanding embedded in its DNA, which has made its advertising ineffective, and what is ineffective on social media is very expensive. As a consumer, Facebook’s ads have always been more relevant to me, even when I do not like them. And as an experimental advertiser of journalism, I find Facebook ads priced at a fraction of Twitter’s.

The reason is that Facebook knows more about me than Twitter does. When put this way, and this is how it is usually put, Facebook seems creepy, but I have never lived in its fear. As long as my data is anonymous, I am happy to be a public resource.

In 2008, when Facebook tried to buy Twitter, one of the three reasons a co-founder of Twitter gave for rejecting the offer was the suggestion that Facebook was morally inferior to Twitter. He was referring to Facebook’s ability and intention to target ads effectively. Twitter, on the other hand, has long postured to consider data sacred even as it milked it. There is a wide perception that advertising is immoral. Even media outlets that are dependent on it, like Twitter, and venerable newspapers that do not let advertising dictate policy, despise advertising. From the time Facebook cracked its revenue model, through targeted advertising, its defamation began. You may have at least once seen the meme: “If you are not the customer, you’re the product.”

One of the arguments against advertising is that it requires social media to keep users hooked, and this is done by fuelling hate and discontent. Before I explain why this is a flawed argument, I must point out that we never used to hear such complaints when Barack Obama used social media effectively to win his first US presidency. Social media suddenly became ‘evil’ only when a type of people, whom I actually get along with, began to lose.

The argument that advertisers indirectly fuel hate on social media is ridiculous when we examine why mainstream journalism lost revenue to social media. Journalism is, by its very nature, negative, and advertisers have for long wondered if their happy materialistic ads look silly on bleak pages about corruption, rape, war and murder. Mainstream journalism survived this complaint because advertisers had few options. But when the world changed, they began to flee regular journalism for happier media. So, hate thrives on social media not because of advertisers, but in spite of them.

When Facebook tried to buy Twitter in 2008, it offered half a billion dollars. When Elon Musk bought Twitter this year, he paid $44 billion. He overpaid, but wiser people would agree that Twitter is still worth many billions. Under Musk, if it can cure itself of its need for grandstanding and accept that it is in the business of advertising, it would perform a social good by surviving the times.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’ .

In Opinion, Jayati Ghosh delivers a message to the adults in the room of global macro policy. Rajrishi Singhal says India is likely to push the G20 envelope. Long Story profiles the Indian ‘team’ at the Qatar World Cup.





Why so many bought into the global cult of crypto


2022-11-27

I cannot prove it, but I am convinced that the people who waited in queues for a whole night to buy an expensive phone were also among the first to buy Bitcoin. Today, as cryptos collapse, I wish to present a brief history of how cryptos became mainstream, and what it reminds us of human nature.

I won’t begin at the beginning, but at what is convenient. In 2008, the Western financial system collapsed, giving greed a bad name. In the aftermath of the crisis, someone who called himself Satoshi Nakamoto put out a paper that showed how a financial transaction does not require the inconvenience of trusting an intermediary, like a bank or a government. Nakamoto proposed a currency called Bitcoin, which would be created from nothing by a network of computers as they perform computations to create it. Its value is not underpinned by anything valuable except that people want it and it is finite. It was peer-to-peer money that was a rebuke to central banks and governments.

You might also like

Mid-caps, small-caps a good bet, but watch your steps

Govt readies ambitious plan to lift sagging exports

Wary microfinance lenders go for secured loans

How MarketsMojo’s Mohit Batra stands apart in PMS field

This is not the origin of cryptocurrency. Crypto emerges from government paranoia. Years before the birth of Bitcoin, the National Security Agency of the US pondered the idea of cryptocurrency in academic papers. Even though these papers anticipated that such a currency would be a threat to the government, they appeared to talk about it with a degree of respect and fondness. In fact, some people have speculated that Nakamoto, whose identity is not known yet, was from the US government.

At first, Bitcoin was known to only a few software engineers, especially egalitarian coders who spoke like artists, suffered from things that ailed artists, and were always complaining about money, corporations and government. But slowly, Bitcoin attracted Beautiful Losers, if I may borrow a term from the title of musician Leonard Cohen’s unsung novel. These were the underdogs of America who lived in the hope of favourable anarchy. Many of them were not techies or people who could fully grasp what Nakamoto’s white paper tried to say. What they saw was revolution against evil banks, paper trails and the end of paying protection money to the government.

People think that an idea is transmitted in its most powerful way by domain experts. This is not true. Domain experts do talk well about ideas that they fully understand, but it is people who don’t know too much—dilettantes, enthusiasts, fans—who infect the world with their enthusiasm for ideas that are new to them. They were the first evangelists of Bitcoin.

When Nakamoto set out to explain his idea, the circumstances were conducive for it to become religion. The financial crisis of 2008 left many people poor, nervous, pessimistic and angry at the establishment, and it accentuated the anxiety of those Beautiful Losers whose mental health was already poor. Then some of them heard of this mysterious man who created money from air. The anonymity of the founder, and his vanishing, contributed immensely to the cult of Bitcoin. It gave Bitcoin a degree of delinquency, anarchy and selflessness. It was all so Bohemian, the exact opposite of global banking. People who were susceptible to believing began to believe.

The first real-world transaction using Bitcoin is believed to have happened on 22 May 2010, when one Laszlo Hanyecz bought two pizzas for 10,000 Bitcoin. That would be, even in today’s fallen token price, about ₹1,300 crore.

As the cult of Bitcoin grew very powerful, the price of Bitcoin soared. The early buyers grew very rich and could not stop talking about it because they were new to success. They also spoke of the many ways in which Bitcoin would change the world. They were not charlatans. Cons are usually very poor transmitters of ideas. It is the delusional who can infect. And they infected millions. Many cryptocurrencies came to be. One spoof token was created, with the face of a dog, to lampoon the craze for cryptos. This spoof crypto, too, became valuable.

Cryptos promised anonymity of financial transactions and diminished the power of legal tender. In that way, cryptos promised a form of hyper-democracy that reduced the nuisance of government in the lives of people. It is a surprise that governments across the world allowed cryptos to grow so big.

It is in the very evangelical DNA of American tech that it transmits an idea as a moral necessity that will unify the world into some version of the West. This happened with the internet, mobile phones and social media. But governments have no reason to cede power so easily and everything that is supposed to free us ends up regulated.

A government-approved crypto is not a crypto, it is just a fancy form of fiat money. We are today in a phase where governments are slowly transforming cryptocurrency into something more familiar and old.

Very soon, the entire crypto system will begin to resemble the financial system it was designed to overthrow. That is because the way of the world has a good reason to exist. The world we have is a consequence not of what people say, but of what people actually do.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’.

Elsewhere in Mint

In Opinion, Manu Joseph writes how the global cult of crypto found so many believers. Sarah Green Carmichael tells why middle managers at companies deserve gratitude. Sandipan Deb writes why college graduates regret what they chose to study. Long Story reveals how Adani is giving jitters to south Indian cement companies.





Why contentment could let people down as India grows


2022-12-04

This is a bad omen for people who are prone to contentment.

To be satisfied with what one possesses is one of our most famous virtues. This means that it is a personality type that has been, over centuries, promoted as an admirable quality. The content are usually people who inherited money that has grown faster than their nation’s economy, or those who used to be ambitious and unhappy but have decided to be unambitious and unhappy, or those who never had the will to exert themselves.

You might also like

5 charts show why the world is cheering India’s economy

India will spend ₹3,500 crore on toys to outplay China

Why housing real estate remains a losing proposition

This manager’s small-cap fund gave 40% CAGR returns in 3 yrs

Over the next five years, if there is tremendous and unprecedented economic progress, content people will be priced out from their good lives. If they are tenants, they will increasingly find it hard to afford their rent; if they own their homes, they will be under pressure to sell and move away; they will also see other sort of people surround them in their neighbourhood who may make them feel poorer; good hotels and holidays will become unaffordable to them. It would still be cheap to be middle-class in India, but it will become very expensive to be considered rich or upper middle-class . A bit of all this has already happened.

You may argue that India is so poor, its median household income so low and its middle class so stingy, or if you want to say it nicely, ‘price conscious’, that there will always be a band of good life that remains affordable. This is a country where poverty subsidizes the consumption of the middle-class and wealthy. Discounted food, electricity and conveyance meant for the poor are enjoyed more by the affluent, the section from where most of the content emerge. So you may argue that even if the content are priced out of their old affluent life, India will provide them a new affluent life that is affordable to them.

But this argument is flawed. Let us look at what is about to happen. Over the next five years, the affluent who have not prospered will see their lifestyles deteriorate. And affluence is primarily a feeling of being affluent. Also, precisely because India is, broadly speaking, poor and its default setting is to assume everyone is poor, affluent lifestyles are led by very few. Unlike in advanced economies or even other middle-income nations like Thailand, the difference between fine living and second-best lifestyles is quite steep and perceptible.

There is worse. The fact that I have faith in India’s immediate prosperity does not mean I am optimistic about the quality of life. In fact, it is going to deteriorate as it often happens w

hen you unite Indians and money. Urban traffic is going to get worse, the air will kill, faster highways will be fatal and crimes will rise. The third-rate quality of our cities will not reduce the economic activity of society. We will still get richer because we have a low bar for living.

The cost of fine living in India is not entirely about living well. A significant chunk of the expense is merely on excluding a majority of Indians. The good life, in India, is an island that keeps out ‘real India’. That is the meaning of gated colonies and ‘progressive schools’ and ‘fine dining’.

As the qualify of life in India deteriorates in the wake of the country’s economic progress, the content will be priced out of their islands, too, that guard them from the tumultuous ocean of India. They will increasingly find it hard to escape India within India, and that is a kind of poverty.

You can see a bit of this already. Look up five-star hotel rates in Goa this December—they are generally higher than the room tariffs of similar hotels in Western holiday destinations, Dubai or Singapore.

After Annie Ernaux won a Nobel prize for literature this year, I encountered many times this passage from her book Simple Passion: “When I was a child, luxury was fur coats, evening dresses, and villas by the sea. Later on, I thought it meant leading the life of an intellectual. Now I feel that it is also being able to live out a passion for a man or a woman.”

You may have guessed that the point of this passage, and the reason why so many people shared it, is in the beauty of its final sentence. But I was struck by Annie Ernaux’s second line.

I can see the literary beauty in a sentence that claims passion is a “luxury”, but I don’t find that true or convincing. What is true is that one of the great luxuries of the rich is the option they have to lead “the life of an intellectual”.

It is a luxury that has brought humanity great riches. Of course, there were and are the ungifted rich who dabble in mediocrity and sermonizing, but almost all our intellectual wealth has come from the gifted rich who had the “luxury” to do what they wished to, or who built great sanctuaries for pure arts and sciences.

It is this ultimate luxury that some of India’s content people will try to hold on to even as they slowly turn bitter, unable to accept that they are not the country’s elite anymore. Thus do we arrive at the origin of intellectual lament.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’ .

Elsewhere in Mint

In Opinion, Rahul Narayan writes why MPs and MLAs must retain special rights to free speech. Look at the GDP data to know where the budget would go, says Rajrishi Singhal. Long Story reveals the mess Oyo is in just before its IPO.





Does India keep people in an endless state of childhood?


2022-12-11

Our meeting did not take place on the appointed date, though I would think of the subject. I have never thought so much about a theory that I had, at first glance, dismissed as too esoteric. My intuitive reaction was that modern Indians are not so naive, and that they only pretended to be child-like. But then, had I misunderstood the premise? I reached out to him to find out why he felt so and what examples he had. I wanted to have an argument over a series of emails that I could write about. But I got the feeling that he did not want to discuss the matter with me anymore. But I did not stop thinking about it.

You might also like

Apple plans to push India up in its value chain

HCL Tech puts IT investors on edge

JSW Group dusts off electric vehicle plan

HUL’s bet on health & wellness needs time

Do Indian adults behave like children? And does India keep Indians in a state of childhood? If you do not try to connect these two questions, that is search for an answer that connects these two questions, then the idea becomes more persuasive.

It is possible that all governments, to an extent, infantilize their own, but there are some circumstances that are unique to India.

One of the triggers that made me take the subject seriously was when the Reserve Bank of India decided to protect Indian credit card users from auto-debits. As a result, a few weeks ago, most digital recurring payments to merchants failed and a segment of our digital economy collapsed. There was chaos for a few days. To reset such payments, Indians had to perform of a set of tasks that seemed complicated and tedious. The only happy people were a few Indians who were once fans of The New York Times and now wished to cancel their subscription, which is very difficult because you can’t just click a button for it; instead, you have to call or chat online. But RBI, through a rule to guard Indians who did not ask to be guarded, liberated thousands of NYT subscribers.

Our central bank has traditionally worked under the assumption that we are gullible. A digital transaction in India is full of friction, requiring multi-factor okays. It is as though RBI thinks Indians are not mature enough.

Many wings of the Indian government treat Indians in this manner. They bully us in many ways, and there is a presumption visible in every public policy—that we are not smart or mature. For instance, the legal drinking age in two Indian states is 25, and in most it is 21. It is ridiculous not because there is widespread drinking among adolescents and people in their early twenties, but because it reveals how governments see Indians in their early twenties as kids.

Is the Indian government right, though? Are Indians juvenile?

But then, if you don’t stretch the argument to absurdity, it is wrong to infantilize even children. One of the big mistakes mainstream education and entertainment industries do is in presuming, with vapid euphemisms, that children are less intelligent version of adults. As a result they are presumed to be frivolous, and addicts of entertainment. Also, there is a presumption that they are “innocent” and should be protected from sexual ideas and images of drugs and violence. All of this India does to Indian adults, too.

There is a whole clutch of Western films that are rated “adult” for theatrical release in India, but are still censored to protect adults from the menace of sex. It is as though India believes that it has created a vast nation of sexually starved people who will behave like adolescents if they see sex.

It was only a few months ago that India finally acknowledged the 16+ category as people who are on the spectrum of adulthood, mature enough to watch a bit of nudity. If you look at the age ratings of many global films and series, you will notice that Indian authorities and parents assume that their children are the least mature, who need to be protected from “corrupting influences”.

Indian spiritual gurus not only treat their followers as children, but also clearly say they are. Not surprising then that some spiritual heads are known as ‘mothers’. We can argue that all religions have that condescending tone—that deems all ordinary people the children of a sacred being. But in India, it is a degree more. Take, for instance, this part of Rabindranath Tagore’s acceptance speech after he was awarded the 1913 Nobel Prize in Literature: “Is not the East the mother of spiritual humanity and does not the West… do not the children of the West amidst their games and plays, when they get hurt, when they get famished and hungry, turn their faces to that serene mother, the East?”

On their part, Indian adults do behave like children. For example, consider how Indians behave on flights, especially international. A few days ago, a German flight attendant told me how overworked she feels when most passengers are Indian. Indians seem to have many demands. More water, more food, more drinks. And they mess up the toilets, I am told. And, some passengers go off to sleep on the floor and pretend to be in a coma when flight attendants try to wake them.

There are, of course, aspects of life where the Indian government does not treat its own as precious children. India does not protect us from lethal dangers like road accidents, or ensure there are automatic doors in all trains, or insist on fire safety in factories. India only protects Indians from themselves.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist and the creator of the Netflix series ‘Decoupled’ .

Elsewhere in Mint

In Opinion, Puja Mehra says ‘Arjuna’s eye’ hasn’t quite been on inflation. Can ChatGPT ever produce an original work of physics or philosophy? Sandipan Deb answers. Long Story tracks the outlier tractor in rural India.





The idea of ‘private spaces’ can get our free speech back


2022-12-19

It is time to accept that Indians have lost their free speech, and may not regain the freedom for many decades. Today, a small group or even a person who is offended, or actually not really offended but wants to have fun, can go to court and call for the arrest of publishers, authors, journalists, producers, actors, just about anybody who has said anything outside their home. India is a paradise for the offended. As a result, publishers are forced to withdraw thousands of copies of books from bookstores. Filmmakers and executives of streaming platforms are self-censoring, fearing trouble. No one knows what they can say anymore. Works of entertainment art and intellectuality that enrich millions can be taken hostage by one person who claims to be offended. I have a solution to the problem.

There is a place where India gives us complete freedom to say what we want, and also be nude, and perform some types of sex if not all: home. We are largely free as long as we are not in public. What we need to do is extend the idea of private space beyond home. We have to persuade India to consider a book, a film, an auditorium, an online channel or a stage as a private space. In return, for practical reasons because India cannot be defeated, works that wish to qualify as private spaces will limit their audiences to a size that does not worry the state. I have a figure in mind, but before that I need to say why I feel free speech can be protected in India only by removing it as public material and deeming it private.

You might also like

Samara Cap leads race for Birla’s insurance biz

Poonawalla readies ₹1,000 cr fund for growth-stage firms

Midcap froth clears, but caution remains

Money managers tell where Indian market is headed in 2023

Going to court is useless. Indian law has always respected a person’s right to be offended more than a person’s right to speech. Even Ambedkar and Gandhi, two luminaries of modern India, had stated that they did not consider freedom of expression absolute. Their influence is in our laws that govern this freedom.

Free speech is natural, but freedom of speech is a fabrication. This is not contradictory because liberty is not a feral freedom; it is merely a good idea. Everyone wants to speak their mind and create artistic expression, but why should powerful people or the offended allow it? The idea that the powerful would graciously permit free expression out of a sense of morality or modernity is not only naive, but also a misunderstanding of how the West won extraordinary freedoms of expression. Their origins lie in the attempts of nobles to control the monarchy through the ruse of equality, fairness and free speech; also in attempts, down the ages, of a society’s second rung to rein in an elite through the same techniques.

In India, in the foreseeable future, we are unlikely to see a leader whose priority is to liberate Indians from the tyranny of the thin-skinned. We need to begin a practical movement that does not demand absolute free speech, but asks for works that promise to stay niche and within the private domain.

Here is a rudimentary mechanism for ‘private spaces’. A work or object that wishes to be ‘private’ will first announce that it is so. It will not be given free and will undertake to reach only a small fraction of Indians. This number may vary depending on the work. For instance, a person who wishes his lecture to be considered private can say anything to a maximum of a thousand people. The speaker cannot be charged with hurting sentiments. There will be, of course, a declaration at the start of the speech that it is private and those who are vulnerable to offence must leave. If the speech is broadcast, or put online, it needs to adhere to restrictions for the visual medium that I will arrive at in a moment. A book that wishes to be considered a ‘private space’ will restrict its print-run to a quarter of a million. An average book is read by four people; so the expected exposure of such a book is roughly one million. Books that call themselves private spaces will not be available in libraries. Films that wish to be considered private will declare that they might be offensive and unsuitable for people who are likely to be offended by an orange or green swimsuit. Such films will not sell more than 10 million tickets. Streaming platforms, too, will place such restrictions. If the viewership of a ‘private space’ film crosses 2.5 million households, it will be withdrawn. Comedy shows, or speeches that are webcast or broadcast will also adhere to similar curbs.

I know this is clumsy, and even surrenders nominal free speech to the government, but I do not see any other way. Why, though, should politicians agree to make a legislative amendment to permit this?

I believe they can be persuaded. Private spaces are small, so unthreatening. There is a price that creators are willing to pay to claim their works are private—modest revenues instead of jail. Another motivation for politicians is that the suffocation of expression in India today is making it easy for revolutionary heroes to rise. When the bar is so low for what is bold, it becomes easy for fake journalism and other kinds of activism to shine. Activists thrive in entertainment and art only because everything they say seems brave. They will not be able to compete against middlebrow art that is set free. Private spaces can thus serve as pressure valves.

Let us not forget that already there is an example of a functional ‘private space’— books, where you can say things that you cannot in a film. The logic of the state is that books reach very few people, hence are not threatening even as they promote the myth of India as a free place. That is all the idea of a ‘private space’ is about—let a minority enjoy the riches of art without threatening the culture department of the state.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’.

Elsewhere in Mint

In Opinion, Pranjul Bhandari says India’s got a chance to shed pandemic scars and reach out for the stars. Rajrishi Singhal looks back as we look forward to global cooperation. Long Story narrates how Sebi is trying to separate your money from your broker.





How nasty quarrels could seed good public behaviour


2022-12-25

Indians are among the worst people to fly. Nicer Indians have been hoping to reform them, but reformation is generally useless. Good public behaviour is not about character; it is about pretending to be good because the other option will have bad consequences. But, daily, in airports, cafes and malls and offices, India trains Indians to believe that bad behaviour is safe, even advantageous. Also, a sign of authority.

You might also like

Market needs a Santa rally as Dec sees 32-yr low returns

Need credible fiscal consolidation path: Bibek Debroy

Where is the PSU stocks rally headed?

Trends that defined India’s stock markets this year

A cultural circumstance of Indians is that they show respect by appearing servile and that elicits an animal instinct from whom they serve. How much bad behaviour we tolerate at the very first instance is how we train people to treat us. And Indians in the service industry have been training not only Indians, but the whole world to treat them poorly. The long rope they give and their hamming of servility when they only mean to convey respect, makes even people from the West forget their manners a week after they land in India.

This was why the flight crew of Air India behaved in infamous ways, especially on the Gulf and East Asian sectors that often served passengers who were not very sophisticated. Once on an Air India flight, when the carrier was still owned by the government, a man complained about the food and the flight attendant told him, “Sir, next time you fly Jet.” True, such swag also emerges from the fearsome job security that a government employee has, but I am confident that she was also consciously training the guy and his like-minded peers to behave themselves.

If Indians know that they cannot get away with bad behaviour, they always consider the option of good behaviour, something that most Indians experiment with when the crew is not Indian but Caucasian. White people seem to terrify them. Video clips of Indian flight attendants showing a low threshold for poor behaviour would thus further persuade Indians to be nice to fellow Indians as well.

Even so, I do not want flight attendants to have such a resounding victory that they transform into the self-important and fierce cabin crew on American airlines. But then, no human system achieves social equilibrium; life swings between unfairness and excessive worker assertion; between how Indians behave with flight attendants and how American flight attendants may treat an Indian who has asked for a third glass of water. Maybe the closest we can come to social justice is when people who feel strong and assured of their social status concede some poor behaviours by people who serve them.

A few years ago in London, I was in a bus that had several Indian cricket legends, including Vinod Kambli and Kapil Dev. Kambli was standing in the aisle and narrating an anecdote to someone, his hands flailing. The bus driver snapped at Kambli, telling him that he was distracting him and that he should sit down. The bus was not moving; it was stationary in a parking lot. The driver probably did not know Kambli, but he knew he was an Indian cricketer, and that so was the person listening to Kambli’s story, and that the bus had several Indian cricketers. It would be lazy to call the driver a ‘racist’; it is almost always lazy to call anyone that. He was just a man who felt something and had complete social freedom to voice it. I think he would have said that to an English cricketer, too, someone who may have been trained by many rude drivers never to stand in the aisle of a bus and talk aloud. Kambli was embarrassed and hurt. He had no choice but to quietly sit down. It was a moment of social justice perhaps. The funny thing about social justice is that it is not what people imagine; often, it is not pretty.

Sometimes, there are practical reasons why Indians behave poorly. For instance, bad behaviour works. I was on an Air India plane that was on the tarmac for four hours at the peak of summer with its air-conditioning off. It was a bunch of unruly passengers who forced the airline to open the cabin doors. (These days when an airline announces abruptly that unruly passengers would be prosecuted, I know that the flight is going to be delayed or cancelled.)

In my previous column, I argued that India keeps Indians “in a state of childhood”, and as a result, Indian adults behave like children. This is also why Indians have so many demands the moment they realize that someone is paid to serve them. Poor behaviour is not just rude behaviour, but also having unfair expectations, like the number of times you want a waiter or flight attendant to come and take orders. Also, in all the offices I have worked, it was common for sahibs to ask a peon to bring them a glass of water. I’ve never worked anywhere where I didn’t hear “paani pilao”, which is still a deep auditory memory of an Indian office. People who fetch their own water are very different from people who want it brought to them.

Office peons themselves are not averse to being ordered around for tasks that should not require another human. In fact, they get a bit concerned if you tell them that the sahibs should be independent enough to fetch a glass of water themselves, because the job security of the poor comes from the childish condition of their masters.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’.

Elsewhere in Mint

In Opinion, Chandrajit Banerjee tells how the budget can enhance our ease of doing business globally. Sarah Green Carmichael says workers aren’t quietly quitting but optimizing time. Long Story probes why the RBI finds it tough to tame inflation.





The difficult job of saying something good about India


2023-01-02

Most Indians do not need my help in identifying what they like about India, so I must first diminish their confidence. They like the India they see through their car windows, watching the many centuries that co-exist in the present; the public chaos that they claim is the real human condition, as opposed to the civic order of the West; and the low threshold for happiness among the poor, and the high quality of domestic life among the middle classes. I do not take these joys seriously because I do not have romantic notions about excessive civic freedoms on the road granted by an incompetent government, or the low standards for happiness among the vast poor, who also subsidize the good lives of those who have romantic views about India.

I present five good things about India that are not misunderstandings of bad things.

You might also like

Keep an eye on these economic indicators in 2023

IBC plot twist may let defaulters keep the reins

Billimoria: from just 1 client to ₹550 crore assets

Manufacturing PMI up but watch out for a spanner in the works

One: There is a sense of economic well-being, especially in the immediate future, and this optimism has infected many social rungs. I share this optimism, and through simple tools like buying shares, I plan to bet big on India over the next five years. The quality of our lives will not improve, but India’s economic ascent will continue.

It is true that the rich will get richer at a faster pace than the rest, but I am not horrified by inequality. I find inequality a natural consequence of progress, and in my defence, I present all of human history in every square inch of the world. Equality is one of those academic thought experiments that some people have taken too seriously. What is as unnatural as equality, though, is modern abject poverty. Like a slum, all modern poverty is a design flaw created by political corruption, incompetence, idealism and other evils.

India is not only prospering, but also reducing the number of people who have to endure the modern hell of poverty. That explains the rise of the Bharatiya Janata Party in many regions. Most Indians are prospering and feel their rise will continue.

Two: There is a persistence of peace and stability in India. India has reasons to be war-torn, and descend into violent civil wars, like some African nations with comparable per capita income. Yet, India has never lost complete control of itself. It has pockets of war and violence, and there exist thugs who are merciless with the defenceless, and most of the nation is generally unsafe for women and children, but by the standards of global strife, India is largely peaceful. Indians have demonstrated, without articulating in sophisticated ways, that they see wisdom in political stability.

Also, some of India’s evils have contributed to the peace. For instance, the absence of European-grade human rights in Indian police stations and the incompetence of the judicial system make it very expensive for low-rung criminals to get caught, and for their handlers. What India lacks in systems and efficiency, it inadvertently makes up for through weak human rights.

Three: Even though Indians are practical, they are suckers for idealism, not only in other people but also in themselves. In this way, India has kept the morals of the freedom movement alive. Indian politicians generally say the right things, claim to do the rights things and are under pressure not to gloat over all the wrong things that made them successful. We may scoff at idealism as merely theory, but then, that is its actual job—to be a theory, to show how other people should be, and also on good days how we ourselves should be, and what we should hold up for our children, and to outline the best that is possible in a human being, however improbable. As a result, most Indians might be corrupt and may even reward criminals in elections, but they retain a sense of righteousness, which is a fundamental right to hypocrisy. Hypocrisy helps us, in an unconscious way, exert pressure on the powerful to keep their practicality within limits. Without idealism, we end up giving too much power to the shameless.

Four: India has not been subsumed by Western culture. Beyond its social elite, India is not a desperate imitation of the West. The true culture of a place is not what its intellectuals try to protect, but one that does not require any egghead to revive—like food, wedding garments, music and fun. An endangered lingual dialect, which cultural conservationists try to save and almost always fail, demonstrates that tradition cannot withstand the force of obsolescence. The West, with its marvellous things, has made many ways of the world obsolete. But Indian fun and some middlebrow art have been robust enough to survive. Most of our films might be bad, but they are our trash and not borrowed. We forget that there are vast regions in the world that do not have their own films or music.

Five: The rise of collective shame. Indians are still not as ashamed as they should be about the unnecessary difficulties of Indian life, but they are more ashamed than they have ever been. And that is a good omen. Shame is not always a performance; we do not need to be ashamed only in the presence of foreigners. A state of the nation can fill us with shame even if no one is watching. It is possible that as Indians prosper, citizens will grow ashamed in indignant ways of poor air and dangerous pot holes. I wish I could say that Indians may even grow ashamed of how we treat those who have lost India’s cultural wars, like Muslims and Dalits, but my promise was that I would say something good about India, not something fanciful.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’

Elsewhere in Mint

In Opinion, Pramit Bhattacharya tells how to save the Census from disruptions. Jyotsna Jha says it’s time to consider a wealth tax. Long Story narrates entry of Indian farming in the carbon credits market.





Awful arguments were made against demonetization


2023-01-08

One evening in 2016, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi said high-denomination notes, or 86% of India’s cash in circulation, would be cancelled overnight. The official objective was to shock and impoverish hoarders. All Indians could return old notes to banks. The government expected hoarders of illegally earned cash not to do so and reveal themselves. Eventually, the Reserve Bank of India said that 99% of the old cancelled cash was returned to banks. And an argument grew that demonetization was a colossal failure because almost all the cancelled money was turned in. This is one of the worst arguments ever.

You might also like

What will be the math behind Budget 2023?

Reliance Capital lenders plan round 2 of auction

The worst may be over for emerging markets

E-scooter maker Ather Energy sets $1 bn revenue target

Demonetization was, of course, a nightmare, and there could be sound arguments that establish why it failed to achieve its objectives, but the evidence is not in the 99% of notes returned.

Of course, the cash was returned, by both criminals and regular people, but the process was not the same for both. Hoarders of illicit cash had to offload money at a substantial loss. They gave cash at huge discounts to those willing to absorb their stash from them. According to some stories I heard, hoarders got only ₹500’s worth for every ₹1,000 they got rid of. Cash launderers then deposited it in bank accounts that were too modest to attract attention. So it is not surprising that most of the illicit cash, divided into smaller tranches, went back into banks. As long as people were not burning cash, the notes were destined to go back in.

An unknowable quantity of counterfeit currency, and here I am not referring to the meagre number of fake notes that were detected, was surely obliterated. The return of 99% of once-legal tender does not reflect the mass disappearance of counterfeit notes.

The second bad argument associated with demonetization is that the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) survived demonetization because of the popularity of Narendra Modi. As we know, the party and Modi not only survived the disastrous effects of demonetization, but also thrived. We forget how incredible that feat was. Indians could not access their own money for many days; and the economy visibly shrank. Yet, Modi and the BJP won over a dozen elections at various levels in the months that followed. If the truth of demonetization was everything that the critical media reported, what explained the party’s success? An argument grew that it was because Indians had grown enamoured of the Prime Minister.

Modi’s popularity was perhaps at its peak at the time, and this may have helped in the first few days of demonetization. It does not explain why the BJP won polls across India for months afterwards.

The fact is, the poor and others who are ‘average’ in other ways had exaggerated respect for the idea of demonetization when it was implemented. They suffered, but they did see the point of it. Their own reasoning might have been faulty, but it is simply not true that they suffered in silence and mysteriously went in droves to vote for Modi and his party again and again. It does not make sense.

Rather, what likely happened was that the poor thought, even many months after the event, that it was an attack on the country’s rich. Intellectuals pointed to long lines of middle-class people outside ATMs and asked where the rich were in those queues; surely the poor can see that? Actually, the poor saw the rich stand in queues for cash, and the ‘rich’ were us.

The poor do not distinguish between people who own Skodas and people who own Mercs —they are all the same, the rich, and the rich were visibly brought to their knees outside ATMs. So Modi’s popularity survived not because of blind adulation of him, but because of wide resentment for people like us, direct employers of the poor. The poor did suffer more than us, as they normally do in any calamity, but they were probably consumed by the reasoning that if they suffered so much, the rich, who had more money, would be suffering more.

The third bad argument, which has also endured, is that every single aspect of demonetization was a failure.

Demonetization, before India implemented it in the worst possible way in 2016, was a somewhat respectable clean-up idea. In fact, people forget that in 2010, when the anti-corruption movement entered its spiritual phase, Baba Ramdev, who had joined the scene, publicly called for the cancellation of high-denomination notes. This proposal seemed interesting for a few days before it was forgotten. I have a theory, by the way, that Baba Ramdev’s pronouncements have served the BJP as test balloons for impending policies.

Demonetization destroyed the confidence Indians had in hoarding cash, especially illicit cash. I had thought at the time that the confidence in illicit cash would be destroyed forever, transforming how real estate is bought and corruption is conducted in India. I might have been wrong about that sort of impact. Still, I do not accept the view that the illicit cash system is as robust today as it was before demonetization. Illicit cash is largely back, but not the way it was before.

Demonetization did point out to India, in an unforgettable way, that operating with cash is risky.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’.

Elsewhere in Mint

In Opinion, Kaushik Basu argues India should propose a G Minor at the G20. Diva Jain says news of industrial policy’s demise was vastly exaggerated. In Long Story, Minister of State for IT Rajeev Chandrasekhar clears misconceptions surrounding a slew of pivotal digital legislation.





The myths around a man in the internet hall of fame


2023-01-15

He is Aaron Swartz, a programming prodigy. When he was 14, he worked on an early version of Really Simple Syndication, better known as the RSS feed. At 15, he helped develop Creative Commons licence, which is a way of making copyrighted material free. At 19, he was among the founding figures of Reddit. Eventually, he became an activist and fought for a cause that seemed noble 10 years ago but might not make as much sense today: “a free internet”. He hanged himself in Brooklyn on 11 January 2013. He was 26.

You might also like

Mamaearth’s plans put risky new-age IPOs in focus

Budget may offer sops for shift to green mobility

With $1 billion, Apax leads in race for Quest Global stake

Why Europe’s largest asset manager is betting big on India

After he made a small fortune when his startup was merged into Reddit, and Reddit was then sold, he got involved in activism, chiefly to make information free. He hacked the servers of MIT and stole a large number of academic papers from a journal that were behind a paywall, probably to make them accessible to the public. He was caught and faced charges that were more serious than he may have imagined. He seemed to have no intention to be a martyr. But he did reject an offer to plead guilty, which would have got him a maximum jail sentence of six months. At the time of his suicide, in his Brooklyn apartment, he faced 35 years in prison, apart from financial ruin.

Many believe that MIT and US federal government had overreacted to a boy’s symbolic act of defiance against capitalism. Ten years after his death, his position as a pre-eminent internet martyr is beyond dispute. Yet, the truth is probably more unremarkable than the myths surrounding a hero. After every suicide, people try to find reasons, which tend to align with their own grouses and ambitions and griefs.

Swartz was an activist, but by the time he died, he had moved beyond the ambiguous space of internet freedom. The net itself had become complex. By 2013, it had begun to resemble the world, and no one fights to keep anything in the real world ‘free’.

As in the case of many successful activists, Swartz had some conditions that made normal life and its banal joys difficult. He had dietary problems, oversensitivity to ordinary experiences, ulcerative colitis, and possibly other worries. A few weeks after his death, Larissa MacFarquhar wrote about him in The New Yorker magazine. I was struck by this portion: “His girlfriend Taren always dealt with taxi-drivers, with waitresses. He hated feeling that he was in a position of power over someone, and he hated asking for help.”

Swartz once wrote in his blog: “When I go to a library and I see the librarian at her desk reading, I’m afraid to interrupt her, even though she sits there specifically so that she may be interrupted, even though being interrupted for reasons like this by people like me is her very job.”

MacFarquhar writes, “This wasn’t a simple matter of humility. Having power over other people made you into something he disdained. Being a boss wasn’t just immoral; bosses were stupid.”

He tried a corporate job but did not survive too long.

In an interview conducted on Reddit, the interviewer asks Swartz, “Are you working for Reddit as full-time programmer?”

Swartz: “No, I left reddit several months ago.”

Interviewer: “Why did you leave?”

Swartz: “My boss asked me to.”

Interviewer: “Can you explain what happened?”

Swartz then gives a vague answer about holidaying in Europe and getting back to work in US where he was surprised to be sacked. But what happened was when he was in Europe his ulcerative colitis flared up. He did not tell anyone. This condition can trigger suicidal thoughts. When his boss at Reddit checked his blog he found a short fiction about a character named Aaron who got sacked and then committed suicide. He was fired, in real life, a few days after this episode.

In a blog post written in 2005, he says he has left computer programming and taken up sociology because “I want to save the world.”

There was someone else, closer home, who did something similar. A student of microbiology, Rohith Vemula, shifted to sociology because, as he stated, he wanted to make the world a better place. He too killed himself, and by hanging. On 17 January, six days after the third anniversary of Swartz death.

Sociology is an odd field for those who wish to save the world. One of the fathers of sociology is Auguste Comte, who invented and wore attire that had buttons only at the back so that he would not be able to wear it without assistance, thus requiring the attendance of another person for the simple act of dressing up. What good can come from such minds?

The hidden darkness in some ideas endures the way only darkness can, and infects the young, who writhe in their own anguish, searching for a glorious reason to hang their reasonless pain.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’

Elsewhere in Mint

In Opinion, Merryn Somerset Webb says it’s a gamble to let woke ideas form your portfolio. Nitin Pai writes on the chances of an open decentralized internet. Long Story showcases 27 tech wonders from CES Las Vegas.





It’s a wonder what most Indian politicians actually do


2023-01-22

One of the worst things about dying in India is the poor quality of obituaries. Most tributes termed Yadav a “socialist leader”. What does it mean? Nothing. Among meaningless words in Indian political reporting, ‘socialist’ is on par with ‘secularist’.

Yadav was a successful man, of course. Yet, obituaries struggled to explain what he did for other people. His two remarkable feats are that he became a Member of Parliament at the age of 27 and years later contributed to the political pressure that forced V.P. Singh as prime minister to adopt recommendations of the Mandal Commission, which opened reservations for a broad band of Indians, thereby defeating the whole point of quotas.

You might also like

India’s rupee trade bid and the math behind it

How GST brought cheer to some states, not others

RBI to appeal HC order on Yes Bank AT-1 bonds

How a non-compete clause pushed Roongta to RIA practice

It is likely that what Yadav did most of his life was what most politicians, successful or not, did most of their lives. He indulged in politics, which is a mixture of deal-making, lobbying, cobbling alliances, compromising and plotting to win elections. He was caught up in the process of politics. This differs from the formal objective of politics, which is to improve the lives of a huge number of people.

My argument is not that Yadav achieved nothing. It is that in the 20,000 odd days he was a politician, most of them were spent in politicking, which is merely a process. I would have said that this occupied all his political life, but I am not counting the few days when he won polls, gave speeches that influenced people or policy.

Indian politicians are usually entrapped in the political process, which keeps them away from the point of politics. Politics claims it is a means to an end, but most politicians operate entirely in the means. This condition exists in the democratic aspects of all professions, where lobbying and arguments impede actual work.

Politicking has a sense of direction and gravitas because of its objective, which is to transform society, but politicians spend very little time on the transformation part. An overwhelming majority of politicians do not do anything useful for society. In fact, if it were not for the harm they cause, their professional lives would have been entirely without any impact. Imagine a profession where players raise funds to make a movie, forge alliances to raise funds, plot ways to go about it, analyse what would make the cinema project work, but never actually make the film, nor spend even a minute attempting to do so.

Lalu Prasad issued a statement from Singapore where he was recuperating from an operation. He had nothing to say about Yadav’s accomplishments. Instead he said, “Sharad Yadav and I fought with each other, but our disagreements never led to any bitterness.” It captured the essence of their relationship, which was probably more about politicking than doing anything for society.

At first glance, it may seem improbable that Jacinda Ardern can confirm any aspect of Sharad Yadav’s political life. To be the prime minister of New Zealand has to one of the most fulfilling jobs in politics. Every moment, she is the face of her nation and an ambassador of an ideal; that alone makes it a proper morally defensible job. Yet, on Thursday, she announced that she will not run for office and would rather focus on her family life. She said one cannot do her job, “unless you have a full tank, plus, a bit in reserve for those unexpected challenges… I am not leaving because it was hard. Had that been the case, I probably would have departed two months into the job… I am leaving because with such a privileged role, comes responsibility. The responsibility to know when you are the right person to lead, and also, when you are not.”

I do not believe that Ardern quit as PM because she was tired of making a difference to New Zealand. What she was saying is that she is tired of politics, the endless process of carrying key allies and foes with you, watching your back, plotting your moves, and so on, which takes up all of one’s energy before the moral objective of politics even comes into the picture.

The rot where people are stuck in the means and have no energy or interest in achieving ends can be seen in other professions, too. Consider India’s top activists, the activists you know, whom you have read or watched on TV news. What have they achieved? What have they changed? What have they won? Nothing really. They wallow in the intoxication of televised performances, ensconced in the means for years without any interest in achieving the objective of activism.

Some may argue that progress is not all there is to politics. Life is not only about better roads, clean air and prosperity. A society is also about grouses. Classical politicking politicians reassure large communities that they will not be superseded by other communities. And there is value in this. That is why Indians have rewarded cultural guardians. The politicking politician is the creation of the politicking Indian.

This is why every now and then, we see images of people in Mumbai commuting; hordes trying to get inside a compartment where there are already hundreds of people. This has been their plight for decades. Many political revolutions have come and gone in India, generations of politicking has taken place, without figuring out a way to shut the doors of Mumbai’s suburban trains.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’.

Elsewhere in Mint

In Opinion, CM Eknath Shinde writes Mahrashtra was a magnet for investment MoUs at Davos. L. Viswanathan & Madhav Kanoria explain how govt’s proposals will strengthen insolvency code. Long Story tells how to explain the budget to your grandma.





How we survive bores and others probably survive us


2023-01-29

In the film Banshees of Inisherin, a musician stops talking to his friend because he finds the friend a bore. Inisherin is a fictional but highly probable Irish hamlet on a desolate island inhabited by less than 50 people. Choice of human companionship here is narrow; the musician’s friend is a good man, who is famous in the village for his niceness, yet the musician is unable to endure another day of banter with him.

In the past few months, Banshees of Inisherin, which is written and directed by Martin McDonagh, has become one of the most admired films in the world. Not many may have complained when it got nine Academy Award nominations this month. It is as though people can see their lives in the film, surely as victims of bores and not as bores themselves. But then, most of us are both, depending on circumstances.

People develop techniques to avoid or endure bores. They also develop techniques to become interesting to other people, even though they may not regard themselves as dull. But nothing really works in the face of the most cruel conversational structure in human communication—the one-on-one, when two people are left alone in a cafe or bar, or in Inisherin. The problem is with the number ‘two’. A person is adjudged dull only in a one-on-one.

A conversation between two individuals is very different from all other forms of conversation. By now, you would have guessed that what these two people mean to each other is intrinsic to what I am trying to say. Two new lovers who can just gaze at each other like fools, or a father and daughter whose silences are not wounds or rebukes, are not relevant to this generalization. The full tragedy of the one-on-one emerges between acquaintances and sometimes even good friends, and of course spouses.

It is much easier to speak to a thousand people than to one person. A three-person conversation, too, is much simpler because you can stop talking any time and the conversation could still go on, and if there is silence, you do not have to take responsibility for it, and you can be amusing and perform for the world, even though the world is not present, just two of its emissaries. On the other hand, the one-on-one expects both parties to be interesting, a quality that most people in the world do not possess or possess only in a certain context.

This is why for social meetings, I have ‘the rule of three’, which is also the name of a writing principle that states that placing three characters in a scene is generally more interesting than two. I do this not only because I fear getting bored, but also because I want to protect the person who wants to meet me from me.

Maybe I have a lot to say to a thousand people and very little to say to just one person.

An important part of the film’s premise is that the nice man is fond of the musician; yet, the musician cannot stand him anymore. Usually, people don’t consider how they can avoid people who are fond of them. Or that they might be boring to their own friends and family.

Most people find the company of their friends interesting almost entirely because their friends like them. One way in which people reduce the dullness of dull company is by converting the affection of the dull into entertainment, mixed with some alcohol.

As a result, most people in the world have a huge capacity to endure small talk.

We can endure friends who laugh at their own statements, who come to a conversation armed with knowledge of the eight articles they have read on blockchain, and who quote the philosophies of “zen masters”. People also survive other people through our most enduring myth that good behaviour is more important than a good chat.

People exert pressure on others to be nice because they are terrified of rudeness, which takes us deeper into a person. We endure dullness because it can protect us from the depths of other people.

Now and then, like the musician, some people decide they have had enough of small talk, of the dullness of sweet inconsequential people. They therefore decide to break friendships and acquaintances. They even end marriages. Many marriages end because of dullness, but it is in the nature of spouses to claim grander reasons as though they are afraid the family court judge will laugh at them for ending a marriage because it is merely dull. But many divorces are actually proof that people can go to great lengths to end dullness.

When the musician decides to stop talking to his friend, the friend is aghast and starts hounding him, seeking a more respectable reason. Like, maybe the musician is dying? If everyone in the world were as honest as the musician with themselves, in seeing clearly why they wish to end a relationship with a person who likes them, the world would be filled with the lament, ‘you bore me, that’s all.’

Unable to bear the hounding of his friend, the musician makes a threat. If the nice man tries to talk to him one more time, the musician would chop a finger. Then every time the nice man tries to talk, one more finger would go.

People who walk away from the dullness of friendly banter, too, are prepared to endure pain. They become lonely, and may also suffer professionally. Success, one way or another, is a reward for friendship.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





India’s promotion of millets is great but will likely fail


2023-02-05

At one point during her presentation of India’s budget, finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman praised millets as noble food. Prime Minister Narendra Modi thumped the desk in approval and the rest of Parliament joined the tribute as though all of them were eaters of these ancient coarse grains.

Lately, India has been doing something uncharacteristically interesting. It has been offering a health tip to Indians and the rest of the world. It has been asking people to eat millets. The main motivation appears to be to make more money off them, as India is their largest producer. But the government also appears to truly believe millets are healthy. As it is Indian nationalists think anything that is ancient is good for you. So, millets are on their way to be canonized, like quinoa. The sainthood of a food inevitably comes with some exaggerations, but all things considered, millets deserve their late recognition. They are healthier to consume than rice and wheat. This is also why millets are doomed.

Millets are grain. Like ‘vegetable’, ‘grain’ is not a botanical term. From a scientific point of view, grains are the fruit of a type of grass; they can also be considered seeds of grass or even one-seeded fruits.

No matter what we eat, most of it becomes glucose in our stomach and enters our bloodstream. Glucose is a simple form of sugar. The faster a food becomes sugar, the more appealing it is to us. The commercial success of any plant-based food is a measure of it as a sugar-delivery device. That is why the most successful grains of our times are rice and wheat. They triumphed chiefly because their modern varieties are tasty; also, they can be consumed in polished, refined forms without the inconvenience of chewing on a class of indigestible carbohydrates known as fibre.

The modern world is a slave to sugar. There is no religion or tradition or even mother’s love that can endure without sugar. People blame the “sugar lobby” for their addiction, as if they would be eating boiled cauliflower had there been a ‘boiled-cauliflower lobby’. The truth is that the emotional human has very little defence against sugar.

The success of modern rice and wheat, which are good sugar-delivery devices, has killed or diminished the lives of hundreds of millions of people by injecting them with too much sugar. The two great grains have been particularly devastating to people of certain genetic types, like South Indians.

Compared to rice and wheat, millets turn into glucose inside us rather slowly. This is also why they are considered healthy.

What is healthy eating has areas of sound scientific consensus and areas of serious dispute. As a result, diets have many religions with their own divinities and demons. I belong to a modern and sanctimonious creed that does not know its god, but knows the name of the devil, which is sugar.

After the stomach converts food into glucose and releases it into the bloodstream, the pancreas release their most famous hormone—insulin, which sends glucose to the cells for energy, reducing the sugar level in the blood. But when a person releases a high amount of glucose into the bloodstream many times a day for several years, flooding the body with excess insulin, cells begin to defy the hormone and do not absorb as much glucose as they are supposed to. The pancreas then send more insulin, and this trains more cells to defy insulin even more. As a result, many destructive things occur. Organs marinate in high blood sugar for hours, which damages them; the excess sugar is eventually converted into fatty acids and stored in the fat cells of various body parts. Which parts of the body will accumulate fat is a lottery of human genes.

The whole game of my creed is to slow the conversion of food into blood sugar. Millets, like rice and wheat, have a high ratio of carbohydrates, or stuff that can become glucose very fast. But among these carbohydrates is a substance widely known as fibre. Rice and wheat, too, have fibre but millets have more. And fibre slows the conversion of food into glucose. I found the best description of the mechanism in the book Burn: The Misunderstood Science of Metabolism by Herman Pontzer: “Fiber from our food covers the intestinal walls like a wet knit blanket, forming a lattice-like filter that slows the absorption of sugars and other nutrients into the bloodstream. That is why the glycemic index—the rush of sugar into the blood—is about 25 percent higher for orange juice, which doesn’t have much fibre compared to a piece of range, which does.”

Fibre also makes people eat less by quickly giving them a sense of fullness. Also, generally, people like the taste of naked grains and vegetables more than fibrous ones, another reason why they eat less of what is fibrous. This is why I feel India’s promotion of millets will not be much of a success. Millets are not as tasty as unhealthier forms of food; and the world has always demonstrated that between taste and health, people will talk more about what is healthy and then eat what is tasty.

Millets actually face a crisis because the moment the poor can afford other grains, they will probably abandon it. This is what the poor have been doing for centuries. Abandoning these coarse grains. Millets will survive, of course, but in a niche market.

In fact, the glorification of millets as a healthy alternative to rice and wheat will inspire the broader market to corrupt these ancient grains. For instance, the ragi dosa of the future will be more rice and sugar than ragi. This is already the case in some restaurants. Every time the world wants to pretend to be healthy, it ruins a part of my life.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





Most people aren’t anxious about artificial intelligence


2023-02-12

You may have heard that we have been spooked by recent advances in artificial intelligence (AI). If a piece of software can perform a number of tasks better than humans, in almost no time, without whining, and cheaper, what will become of us? We have been told that the bleakness of our future has made us “anxious”. But the fact is even though we acknowledge the advances in AI, a majority of us are not anxious. We are simply not that type.

Most people were not anxious about robots in the 1960s, computers in the 70s, any great automations of the 80s, and about the internet. Some people were anxious, and they are still anxious, and may stay that way, because they are prone to anxiety. And it is they who have been telling us that we must be spooked.

AI anxiety is in the class of ‘climate anxiety’. It is the anxiety of innately anxious people that has been given a name. If it were not AI or climate, they would have found something else to be anxious about.

A quality of anxiety is that it has to spread, seeking new colonies. The intermediary transmitters of anxiety, like journalists and lit-fest organizers, may not be, at their core, anxious people, but they are never sceptical enough of a new anxiety. They may even find it interesting. As a result, they contribute to the spread of the compassionate idea that you may be anxious. It is a wave of compassion that anticipates the miserable. But human society has defences against this. This is why every era has famous anxieties, yet most people are not anxious. You are expected to be anxious about an innovation or a bleak future, but you are not, you are tormented only by personal demons.

Last November, an American organization that has been working on artificial intelligence, including programs that train themselves to mimic human communication, released a prototype of a chatbot that appeared to impress a lot of people. Google scrambled a response. And now a lot of people feel that programs that program themselves to perform a wide range of tasks will influence the immediate future of the world.

The fountainheads of global anxiety, who are usually in the West and never, say, Africa, have moved beyond telling us how millions will lose their jobs. Some of them are in the phase of comforting us, saying that in every age, automation created fear, so it is natural to be afraid. There are cute stories of protests against the invention of paper, the printing press, how in the 16th century Queen Elizabeth I denied a patent for a knitting machine because she feared it would take the jobs of women who knit, and how tailors in New York protested the adoption of sewing machines, and of course how people feared the dawn of computers.

Some also comfort us by pointing out that every automation, though it made some jobs obsolete, created more jobs eventually. This is a popular but absurd argument because people who are made redundant are usually not the same people who are hired in the new jobs created by new technology. How then is that supposed to comfort anyone?

Job losses due to artificial intelligence are highly probable, and the new opportunities in this new world may chiefly favour the young. Most people accept this, yet they are not anxious. That is our nature. People also know they are going to die one day, and even that does not make them anxious.

What if an asteroid is fated to collide with the Earth in a year? Will there be mass anxiety? In that case, maybe. But even that, after the initial hysteria, might be surprisingly less intense that we imagine. I think people can cope with an approaching calamity if everyone is going to get hit. This is a reason why AI does not make most of us anxious.

I do not deny that there could be public issues that create anxieties. For instance, sociology students who perceive their bleak future, or many Muslims in India today. But, even in these cases, the cause of anxiety has to do with the feeling of being in a minority. Generally, anxiety is not caused by a public issue, but by a unique personal situation. A village of starving people is likely to have lower levels of anxiety than a child in an urban middle-class colony whose parents have just lost their jobs.

People who do not have anxieties are under-represented in the media, both the old and the new. They make up most of the world in numbers, but very little in the way of emotional influence. The most powerful transmitters of ideas, whether they are writers or “influencers”, are driven by their personal anxieties that they wish to give more glorious names. This often makes them interesting and persuasive. Take the fear of rogue AI. A thought experiment of Swedish philosopher Niklas Bostrom, to illustrate the dangers of AI, raises the scenario of a machine programmed to maximize the production of paper-clips. Bostrom’s paper-clip maximizer would create new technologies to consume all resources on earth to make as many paper-clips as possible. It would also destroy all humans because they might switch it off, interfering with paper-clip production.

Most people do not feel this sort of anxiety, but the few who are prone to anxiety have successfully created the fear of technology and machines that manifests itself in complex ways. For instance, at first glance, it may appear that excessive concern about privacy has nothing to do with the fear of sentient machines. But I believe it emerges from the same wound. It emerges from the anxiety in a few that seeks more respectable names.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





Nano to Air India: What sets India’s swag apart now


2023-02-19

In the years when kung-fu movies released in theatres, many boys would emerge from a show with a lot of swag, as though they were all martial arts savants you should not mess with. The past few days, I have had a bit of that second-hand sense of well-being after I read that Air India was going to acquire nearly 500 planes from Boeing and Airbus, the largest civil aviation order in history, and that the newly privatized airline might buy a few hundred more, and that other Indian airlines, taken together, might buy over a thousand planes in the next two years. The euphoria reduces when I realize that Elon Musk alone can foot the whole bill, but that is only transient annoyance in the persistence of a joy.

When you derive optimism from the well-being of others, people in Madras used to say, in rebuke, “So why are you happy?” And I can hear an unknown Tamil woman’s reprimand at my borrowed sense of well-being. “Good for Air India, but why are you happy?”

The intent to purchase so many planes suggests that India is thriving and is going to thrive. People who look like me are going to do well. The huge order of Air India was yet another corroboration of optimism that has filled the middle classes despite tech job losses and the perennial laments of salad-eaters in bleak professions that happiness has long died in this world.

This is not the first time I have read in newspapers that the nation is optimistic, but this is the first time I am taking part in it. I did not consider India’s future bright after Pokhran, or during the tech boom from 1998 to 2000, or when India was apparently “shining”, or when Tata Steel bought Corus, which was the largest Indian acquisition at the time.

What was the big deal in exploding a bomb, that too one we did not invent? In fact, what I saw in the rejoicing of the Pokhran tests was a deep sense of cultural inferiority of some Indians who had migrated to the West; they were the ones who were the most ecstatic. I was unmoved by “India shining” because in my 20s, India was not shining for me, nor did it for the millions who conveyed this message at voting booths. I was unaffected by bull runs in markets because no one could convince me then that markets were not rigged. In any case, the prosperity of market gamblers only made rents and real estate expensive for the rest of us in Mumbai, and vegetarian restaurants unbearably noisy.

The optimism of 2007 and 2008 was intense and persuasive. It was manufactured and transmitted in my office, as it was in other media offices. It all began around 2006, when steel billionaire Lakshmi Mittal orchestrated a hostile takeover of what was once the largest steelmaker in the world, the West European company Arcelor. Then, in 2007, Tata Steel bought the Anglo-Dutch steelmaker Corus. There were other Indian acquisitions.

Towards the end of 2007, a fervour as never seen before grew around the launch of what Tata Motors said was the “people’s car” or the cheapest car in the world. (A Pakistani countered with a local cheap car, which was in reality a cart with the roof as an optional feature.)

An idea grew that Tata Motors’ mystery car is an omen that India will make smart affordable tech for all emerging markets. There was global attention. Tata Motors escalated the mystery by keeping all major details of the car under wraps, including its name. The Economic Times reported, “Some say it will be called ‘Jeh’ (the first three letters of Jehangir RD Tata’s name) but there is another school that seems to suggest that it will be called ‘Miracle’“. But when the Nano was launched, I felt the exact opposite of hope for India.

Later that year, even as the Nano appeared doomed, the Tatas bought Jaguar and Land Rover from Ford. The Indian mainstream press, which was not institutionally nationalistic, patriotic or right-wing or any of those things, was ecstatic. Indian steelmakers were buying steel icons, telecom companies were shopping abroad, and now this. But vast sections of the middle class did not feel the thrill. They read about all the seemingly good things that were happening, and that India was shining again. But I could not feel any optimism around me, among the ordinary people, because the paths to well-being were not clear, even to dream.

By the end of 2008, the optimism was over. India seemed to be sinking, and a deep resentment grew against politicians. It came to the fore when 10 terrorists from Pakistan killed dozens of people in South Mumbai. Young people who had never participated in politics took to the streets, and even chased away a local Maharashtrian politician. This was, in reality, the unsung origin of Anna Hazare anti-corruption movement of 2011, which was in reality an anti-politician movement.

But today, the economic optimism around me has a calm certainty about it, despite the classical fears and uncertainties in the lives of working people. Away from a few dismal professions, all of which are in the media, people are preparing to thrive. They are ready for an age of political stability provided by a right-wing government that reflects the provincial practicality of a majority of new Indians. They are preparing for an age of economic opportunities, of widespread adoption of the internet and the smart phone, a dramatic increase in retail bets on the stock market in the form of mutual funds. And, of course, a boom in air travel.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





Lessons for free speech from the Pawan Khera arrest


2023-02-26

Indians were never truly free to say anything they wished, but they did anyway, just like they are not supposed to drive on the right, but they do. Free speech, though ambiguous, never absolute and unloved by the men who created the Indian Constitution, was nevertheless alive in practice and perceptible. That is because free speech in India emerged from a surprising source that had none of the Western poshness those two words carry

In the past 10 years, even as freedom of expression collapsed in journalism and entertainment, the historic source of India’s free speech appeared to hold its own. But that is starting to change now. Something happened a few days ago that is an omen that even the fountainhead may not be safe anymore.

A few days ago in Delhi, Pawan Khera, a Congress party official, presided over a press conference during which he challenged Prime Minister Narendra Modi to set up a joint parliamentary committee to investigate charges that billionaire Gautam Adani is favoured by the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). In the course of his statements, he fumbled while taking the Prime Minister’s name, calling him “Narendra Gautamdas Modi”. The Prime Minister’s middle name is his father’s name—Damodardas. Khera did correct himself, but said that in any case Modi does the bidding of ‘Gautamdas’, probably referring to Adani.

Soon, police in Assam and Uttar Pradesh took cognisance of two separate complaints and booked Khera for “criminal conspiracy”, “promoting enmity on grounds of religion, race, place of birth”, “defamation”, “intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of the peace and statements conducing to public mischief.” Khera, who had boarded a plane, was evicted and arrested before being released on bail. In the Supreme Court, Chief Justice D.Y. Chandrachud said, “We will protect you, but there has to be some level of discourse…” It is not clear what discourse the court needs on this frivolous matter.

You may think that the episode is only another moment in the ongoing collapse of free speech in India. It is a bit more than that for a reason. India’s free speech does not emerge from a Nehruvian or Western ideal, as we have been told. Instead, it emerges, accidentally, from politics—from the speech of politicians, election campaigns, and the media that reported what was said. The nature of electoral democracy ensured that all politicians could be rebuked and insulted. Bal Thackeray, on stage, in front of thousands of people, would roast Sonia Gandhi. People were terrified of Thackeray, but his political rivals said nasty things about him in public. In Tamil Nadu, politicians routinely called Jayalalitha names even when she was in power. The media that reported the words of these politicians, filtering out only sexual innuendoes, always got away because its reporting benefitted all political parties. From this flea market of name-calling, mud-slinging and taunts, and the press reportage of all this, a free speech culture rose. It was not fully protected by any fancy laws, but it ensured that God excluded, everyone was fair game.

I am not suggesting India was a free society before the rise of Narendra Modi. That would be laughable. As a journalist, I have never worked in a free media. There were always people about whom you could say nothing bad. I’ve worked in a place where it was easier to be critical of Modi than Sourav Ganguly. I remember a launch event of Tavleen Singh’s memoirs, Durbar, when the Congress was in power. The invitation was discreet and organizers were nervous, as the book portrayed Sonia Gandhi in poor light. But even with such suffocation, politicians could say anything and get away. It was as though the very source of free speech, which is political polemics, was too powerful to be constrained.

But now we know a politician can be harassed for altering the middle name of another man. It is absurd to arrest him, even if we were to take seriously the complaints of some that Khera tried to alter the parentage of the Prime Minister. (It is amusing that the BJP expects Khera to know which part of the Prime Minister’s name belongs to his father when a few weeks ago Modi had chided the Gandhi family for not adopting ‘Nehru’ as their family name, as though he does not know how patrilineal surnames work.)

With the arrest of a politician for saying something that would be considered minor even among school children, and the Supreme Court not dismissing the matter outright, nor berating the police who took seriously such a frivolous complaint, we may have reached the final stage in the collapse of free speech in India.

People used to think that free speech only mattered to scholars and writers and others who made money off it. Now a broad section of the nation knows that is not true. Across Indian society, in offices, clubs, colleges and schools, there is a suffocation of speech.

Can anything good come of it all? Doesn’t India always need to hit a nadir to come up with heroic moves? In the past, the self-interest of politicians would periodically push them to seek refuge in moral ideas. That is how India improved the stature of its Election Commission, and greatly reduced instances of booth capturing. Now that all politicians in the country are at risk of being hauled to faraway places, like Assam, if they say anything unflattering about Modi, would there be an attempt to make legal provisions of free speech clearer? I don’t know. There might be a Supreme Court ruling that will sound wise and modern, but harassments will likely go on.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





The value of those who keep losing to Narendra Modi


2023-03-05

What is the relevance of ‘good guys’ who always lose? What is the purpose of people who stand for harmony, equality and freedom, but cannot draw the support of citizens who, too, want harmony equality and freedom? What is the point of an activist who speaks to the masses when the masses do the exact opposite of what he asks them to do? In a democracy, what is the meaning of public rejection?

On Friday, we learnt that the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) has expanded its influence over the Northeast after winning two states there and being very much in the game in another. Next year, the party is expected to win India’s general elections easily, even after a decade in power. And it is set to dominate politics for many more years, especially at the Centre. How should we view the people who have been fighting the BJP? What is the point of their existence? This may sound like an insult, but that is not my intention. In fact, I am trying to arrive at their value to us. I am not referring to professional politicians, like Rahul Gandhi alone. I am chiefly talking about the long tail of politics that is not called politics. Idealists, journalists who have not sold out to the BJP, poets, developmental economists, humanities scholars and writers with a moral compass. They have raged against the BJP and portrayed its leaders as hardline Hindus who oppress other religions. Yet, Nagaland, with a nearly 90% Christian population, has voted for the BJP. The intellectual resistance to the BJP has portrayed it as a party that is in cahoots with billionaires, yet the poor vote for the party. (Time and again, what the poor demonstrate is that between the rich and the posh, they despise the posh more.)

The fact that those who stand for the finest human virtues lose against the BJP does not mean that the people of India have no respect for those virtues. Most humans hold the same set of virtues dear, but the hierarchy in which they are held at any point in time is what sets us apart. At the moment, most Indians are at a stage where they wish for swift prosperity more than a sense of harmonious unity with the rest of India. But this does not mean they are dismissive of unity or even the well-being of other people.

So that is the relevance ‘good guys’ have. They are conservationists of a society’s best qualities; they ensure that just because some virtues are not influential anymore, they do not slide further down the ranks of relevance. In that way, they reassure those who fear the BJP that what matters to them is not entirely irrelevant. It is a voice that can emerge only from defeat.

But shouldn’t human virtues have better champions, people who know how to defeat the practical types? Not only do the ‘good guys’ of India not know how to win, they also do not retire; they persist in their doomed fight because they have nothing else to do and they ensure that more talented activists with more potent fights in them do not rise.

To understand the true value of idealists, it is useful to assess not the worst and mediocre among them, but the finest. So let us consider Ravish Kumar, a journalist and activist whose Hindi is exquisite and his calm son-of-the-soil lament is the very voice of India’s conscience. He is the reminder that Indians whose dominant language is their mother-tongue are at a different level of articulation than Indians who have been muddled by English.

The arguments that Ravish makes do not win elections. And his overarching argument that the BJP is bad for the nation is something that people periodically reject. Yet, Ravish is extremely popular. A few times, when I have thought that a group of drivers under a tree are watching a Hindi film, it has turned out that they are watching a clip of Ravish. I have heard Ravish’s voice in this manner from passers-by. Never have I heard anyone listen to Prime Minister’s podcast, ‘Mann Ki Baat’. I know this is all anecdotal, but I believe intuitively that Ravish’s monologues are more popular than Modi’s. Without a doubt, Modi is many times more popular, and he would demonstrate so if ever there is a vote. But voting is not all that people do. There are some healthy things Indians do and listening to the voices of their nation’s conscience may be among them.

Many ideological foes of the BJP do not accept that they are defeated. They feel that as long as they persist, they are not defeated. This is merely wall-poster-grade philosophy. Often persistence is just the doomed Plan-A of people with no Plan-B. It is hope, which is a form of sorrow and a conversation with the self. Also, the idea that their persistence will sow the seeds of a spectacular victory against the BJP many years later is a fallacy. The BJP will, of course, lose in the future, but that would not be because of the persistence of losers, but because of internal turmoil, as the Congress party’s decline has shown.

The charm of Ravish is in his state of defeat. He accepts that all resistance to the BJP is futile in the near future, and that nothing he says or reports will change that. In that way, his work is art, because art is the pathos of the underdog. This is also why Modi’s poetry, in his own observation, is probably not high art. In his poems, he is a kite, soaring with “the grace of the sky”, towards the sun, held back “only by the string”, or “an ocean that leaps with energy”, or a man who is as “upright as a mountain” and as “pure as the river”. Ravish, on the other hand, speaks of the melancholy of defeat. That is the core constituency of art, and people are drawn to art even when they don’t know it is art. I can’t prove it, but I think many people who vote for Modi enjoy the melancholy dispatches of Ravish.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





Why it still matters what the West thinks of Modi’s India


2023-03-12

Let us say, you have to take on Narendra Modi and you need a bigger political force than him for this, whom will you call? Which brings us to why, a few days ago in London, Rahul Gandhi complained about the demise of India’s democracy. He was doing what many disenchanted Indian activists before him have attempted—campaigning to make the West a counterweight to Modi and his Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). Can the West be that?

Seeking external influence to neutralize a local force is not an esoteric tactic. Even ordinary people use it all the time—disenchanted with their primary oppressor, they try to align with a bigger bully.

In the time of street thugs, loyalty was the protection money people paid their thugs. When the thugs were not good enough to protect, people shifted allegiance to a bigger thug. That is how the age of thugs may have ended—when bullies could not protect people from more formidable forces and people sought out more useful oppressors. The mechanism is the same even today. People pay allegiance to a person, belief, organization or an ideological bloc, but if they are not happy with what they get out of their loyalty, they try to align with an equal or bigger force.

The same tactic was at the heart of B.R. Ambedkar’s exhortation to Dalits to abandon the very source of casteism, the Hindu religion, and shift allegiance to Buddhism. This is also why many Dalit intellectuals have glorified the English language and dismissed Hindi. One Dalit activist even attempted to build a temple to Goddess English. Writers and filmmakers who have been ignored by the Indian intellectual establishment routinely try reaching out to the West, where the acclaim industry is more influential. In fact, the value of intellectual acclaim itself is that it is a counterweight to capitalism. And the humanitarian movement in any nation is, one way or another, a part of the global Western counterweight to local strongmen.

Rahul Gandhi did not exactly “address the British parliament” as some of the Indian media reported; he spoke in one of the rooms there, to about 90 people, among whom there were some British parliamentarians. He told them that Modi’s government was “stifling” and that being a member of parliament in India was “quite rough” these days.

Before that, in a chat hosted by a think-tank, he said the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, widely regarded as the mother ship of the BJP, was a “fundamentalist, fascist organisation.” “You can call it a secret society,” he said, “It’s built along the lines of the Muslim Brotherhood and the idea is to use the democratic contest to come to power and then subvert the democratic contest afterwards.” A common message in all his chats was that except for the fact that elections are held, India is not a true democracy anymore. He also claimed his phone was bugged by the Indian government, and that India “has already been invaded” by China. Once, he stated that Europe and the US were not doing enough “to restore democracy in India” as they profited from trade with India.

Rahul Gandhi may believe, rightly, that Indian democratic institutions do not favour him anymore. Once, he probably respected these institutions. After all, his party created them. But then, what use is allegiance if the syndicate does not protect you? So he seems keen to reach out to an external force, the West, to exert pressure on Modi to be fair.

Shifting allegiance from one syndicate to another does not guarantee success. For instance, Ambedkar himself faced failure. Most Dalits did not convert. The Hindu religion, a formidable cultural force, largely prevailed by reforming itself. The West was once a major player in the local politics of emerging economies. It still might be in some, but not anymore in India. As recently as 10 years ago, there were signs that Modi was concerned by what the Western media thought of him. Also, Western governments could arm-twist us with economic threats and sanctions. All that has changed. It is possible that Modi has given up on winning the affection of Western media. Also India is too big now for the West to squeeze.

What does India want to be; which country is India’s role model? If you asked the middle-class this 20 years ago, or even at the height of India’s fake love affair with the Soviet Union, the answer would have been “the United States.” There was a general ambiguous feeling that the West was, all said and done, good. But as people are more informed and misinformed in the age of information, America and the rest of the West do not have that moral heft anymore.

I do not see how the West can seriously infiltrate the present Indian political system to “restore” fair practices. But there are some potent aspects in the Western moral system that Modi and his BJP may underestimate at their own peril. For instance, the West has a superb monster-creating machine in its liberal media. Take, for instance, the global image of Saddam Hussain, Vladmir Putin and even Donald Trump himself. Modi is already in the cross-hairs of Western media, which is an integral part of the ideological bloc known as the West. Modi’s image there, I feel, is just a level better than Putin-Hussain and in the same category as Tayyip Erdoğan and Jair Bolsonaro. It could get worse.

On crimes against humanity, the West might be hypocritical but its concern is not fake. I believe that the West truly finds clear-cut evil despicable. So there would likely be economic and political consequences to a global perception, which Rahul Gandhi may have contributed to in London, that Modi and the BJP committed such crimes.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





Why it takes high talent to produce middlebrow work


2023-03-19

There are no spoilers in the next line. In The Last of Us, the hit HBO web series, most of humanity dies in a fungi pandemic. The fungus takes over the brains of the infected, and manipulates them to attack and bite the healthy, who then become infected in a matter of minutes or hours or longer, there is no telling. Then, they too turn into rabid undead mushrooms. I know I should have just said it is a zombie story. But I was reaching out to some of you who may be infected by snobbery. Even though we will never be friends, I did not want you to deny yourself this series, which belongs to a broad class of storytelling that requires real artistic talent—the middlebrow.

What is considered highbrow is usually a product of self-absorption and narcissism, even when it is pure and really good. A highly networked megalomaniac with limited talent but a powerful personal experience or mental ailment can achieve highbrow. Its unspoken claim that true art is primarily anthropology and not entertainment is bogus. People who scoff at entertainment are usually people who are incapable of entertainment. Highbrow can be exquisite, but most of it is boring and designed to be extolled by the intellectually frail who wish to hide the fact. Lowbrow, on the other hand, is a gamble of merchants on what they think most people would enjoy. At the heart of the lowbrow is the notion that serious artistic talent is the enemy of entertainment. Yet, despite going by ‘what people want’, a large proportion of lowbrow creations fail, as bets tend to.

Middlebrow is art that reaches out. Its clarity is in its desire to succeed. Through entertainment, it attempts to win the right to say what might not be entertaining. It is hard to create. In comparison, the purity of highbrow is facile. Anyone can write a dense unreadable book about his mama’s dreams.

It is the middlebrow that requires talent. In its bid to be commercially successful, it does not aim to be extraordinary in every frame. What a good middlebrow work has is islands of excellence in an ocean of familiar tropes.

I am aware that terms like ‘highbrow’ and ‘middlebrow’ are abstract and subjective. What is highbrow to some might be middlebrow to others, and so on. When I first read Salman Rushdie’s Midnight’s Children, I was around 16 and I thought it was highbrow. Not anymore. Also, from a metaphorical point of view, only ‘highbrow’ makes sense because humans cannot or do not make their eyebrows ‘low’ or ‘middle’. Even if they did, they will not convey what the terms hope to. Middlebrow and lowbrow are derived from highbrow and are substandard metaphors. Even so, the creative works they represent are real. You may not agree with what I consider middlebrow, but that does not stop me from persuading you that semi-commercial-art is the greatest form of art.

I can, though, pass on a reasonable definition of the middlebrow. It is something that needs word-of-mouth to succeed. That is why the persistence and survival of the middlebrow is a triumph of fun-loving people, who are its patrons and evangelists. Review journalism and the acclaim industry usually do not celebrate the middlebrow. In India, especially, you will find more fuss around dull “issue-based” or “important” works than entertaining films and books. A middlebrow work of quality has to be familiar and cliched, but also have a reason to exist. The problem it must solve is how it can still surprise you. Everything that can be said has been already; there are no more new stories, or even characters. Audiences know all the tropes. Yet, they need to be startled.

The Last of Us, an adaptation of a video game, does that. In the process, this series exposes the ‘genre’ of a story as nonsense. Broad classifications like ‘comedy’ and ‘horror’ may be practical, but, generally, most labels that stories are given, like ‘literary fiction’ and ‘coming-of-age’, are marketing rubbish. In The Last of Us, which is a ‘zombie film’, there are episodes where you do not see a single zombie. Its science is more persuasive than the theories in Interstellar. One episode, which appears early, is almost entirely the love story of a gay couple.

I have never seen a bad zombie movie. That is probably because I have seen only five, including Michael Jackson’s famous Thriller music video. Zombieland, World War Z and I Am Legend were, like The Last of Us, better experiences than many “important” issue-based hours of drudgery I have suffered.

Good writers almost never write a story for the sake of the story. The origin is always something else, and the story then becomes a device to contain that purpose, which could be to show us a character, or to mine an emotion. Sometimes, what you really want to say does not need the whole expanse of a film or a book. When I think of the relationship between a story and the point of telling the story, I am often reminded of the zeppelin. Most of this old air-ship’s volume is just air, but its whole point is the tiny gondola where its passengers sit. In a middlebrow work, the story occupies disproportionate space, but the reason for its existence is that little thing that the eye may miss.

The most interesting element in The Last of Us is the interaction between its two central characters, a violent alpha male and an orphaned teenager (not that the alpha is not orphaned). It is possible that the whole purpose of the series was a writer’s attempt to portray a father-daughter relationship. If so, to embed it in a zombie story was a masterstroke. I would say if you have anything to say at all, anything important and dense, and complex, and thus with no market value, just frame it as a zombie story.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





A brief history of India’s fake claims to true happiness


2023-03-26

Over the past decade, a global survey has been asking thousands of people across the world how happy they are on a scale of zero to ten, in six distinct ways of being happy. Their answers form the core of the annual World Happiness Reports, which have been a source of periodic unhappiness for many Indians. India is consistently ranked at the bottom, among dystopian nations, unhappier than even Pakistan, which triggers special trauma in sensitive Indians. The 2023 World Happiness Report does not actually rank India 126th out of 137 nations. Indians have ranked themselves, inadvertently showing us as people who are sadder than Ukraine, Russia, Iraq, Sri Lanka and, of course, Pakistan. Any measure of happiness involves a few foolish processes, and these reports do couch left-wing righteousness as anthropology, but they are less nonsensical than a fable my generation grew up hearing: that Indians are “the happiest people on earth”.

Among the first things we heard as children was that the rich were unhappy and the poor were happy. Also, Indians apparently had an innate spiritual power that no one else possessed, some great ancient secret that the West came seeking. Every now and then, a public figure would speak of an unhappy West and our joyful poor. In a Shah Rukh Khan film, his character scoffs at the loneliness of Americans who had “everything” but did not have family, while admiring Indians who had nothing but whose lives were filled with family. In the age of social media, we see posts claiming to be true portraits of happiness. These often feature images of the poor diving into a pond or enjoying rain. It appears water is somehow vital to the visual representation of joy.

All through this farce, India has been one of the most miserable places on earth. As an Indian reporter who has travelled through India and the West, I find it easy to believe the broad conclusions of the 2023 report—that West Europeans are most likely to rate themselves as happy, that suicide rates say nothing about happiness anywhere, and that the average Indian is among the world’s least happy.

This rings untrue to upper middle-class Indian patriots because they are among the happiest. They would score well on the World Happiness Report’s survey that asks people to rate their own happiness on six aspects of life: social support of peers, financial well-being, health, freedom to make important decisions, generosity of society and the absence of corruption.

The bafflement of India’s middle class at the nation’s rank among the most miserable is actually predicted by the report in one of its more credible exercises—a country’s measure of joy inequality. To measure this form of inequality, the report takes the happiest half of a sample in a nation and its unhappiest half, and then considers the gap that separates them. In Finland, ranked the happiest nation in the world, the gap between the top half and bottom half is narrow. This means there is a near uniformity in how people rate themselves.

Several affluent nations demonstrate such uniformity. But the nation that is most equal in its self-valuation of happiness is not a happily rich nation, but Afghanistan, which is among the world’s most miserable places. This means that in Afghanistan, the happiness of the top half is not much higher than that of the bottom half. In other words, the country is almost uniformly miserable.

On the equality of joy, too, India fares poorly. Indians who rate themselves as happy are much happier than those who say they are unhappy. This reflects an India that even the sightless can see—a country where life is very good for the rich and miserable for the poor; where it is vastly advantageous to be born in the right home, and a severe handicap not to.

There is, of course, a big problem in this attempt to measure the happiness of nations. It is not, as patriots argue, in its “methodology”. Asking people whether they are happy is a reasonable way to measure this abstract quantity. The problem is not with the sample size either. The report claims that “typically” around 1,000 people, irrespective of population, participate in the survey every year. We can quarrel with the report on whether this is enough to make overarching pronouncements on our sense of well-being, but this is not an important argument. The report’s real problem is why it even exists. This is not an exercise a Donald Trump or Elon Musk or a conservative strongman anywhere would consider worth his time. That should point us to the sort of people who would be interested in such a survey—economists who want a welfare state.

Not very long ago, the same kind of people promoted Bhutan as the happiest place on Earth. It worked. In the 2013 Hindi film, Lunchbox, an unhappy woman in Mumbai plots to flee to Bhutan in search of joy.

Bhutan’s experiments with happiness began in 1972, when king Jigme Singye Wangchuck popularized the idea of ‘gross national happiness’. In the 2000s, this juvenile idea caught the imagination of liberal economists who thought they had found a tool to defame the focus on economic growth. But, it turns out, Bhutanese people do not rate themselves well on the happiness scale. The first World Happiness Report, published in 2012, pays rich tribute to Bhutan, but the country is ranked low. It is western Europe that has consistently regarded itself happy.

The moral of the story is that the secret to happiness may lie in colonizing, brutalizing and plundering vast regions of the world so that you can one day raise a financially pampered and socially compassionate population that cycles to work.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





Dismiss biomarkers that say you are ‘fine’ and live long


2023-04-02

Assume that a pandemic blinds over half the world’s people. Would modern medicine deem blindness ‘normal’? That is highly probable if we consider how health is viewed today. Take, for instance, what doctors are trained to consider “normal ranges” in our blood test reports. Often, these pleasant markers do not signify health at all, but only show where we stand relative to other people. Yet, like sight, health is not relative. In the world of the blind, a one-eyed man is not fit. Health is absolute. Health is the best version of us.

At a time when gluttony, addiction to sugar and sloth have made a large number of people unhealthy, we must dismiss what modern medicine says is “normal” about us, and instead find ways to be exceptionally healthy. This is the message in a new book Outlive: The Science and Art of Longevity by Peter Attia, a physician and founder of Early Medical, which helps people live long if they so wish.

He is a doctor who is frustrated with the mediocrity of modern medicine, which he calls Medicine 2.0 with mild contempt. It is in the business of prolonging death, which is glorious and lucrative, and not prolonging a healthy life, which is less melodramatic. Meanwhile, modern food is filled with things that can kill us. We are ancient bodies that ingest new toxins. “Our genes no longer match our environment,” Attia writes, “Thus, we must be cunning in our tactics if we are to adapt and thrive in this new and hazardous world.” Cunning is an excellent choice of word. The world, which is incapable of showing love without sugar, and reassures us that our lipid profile is ‘normal’ because a large proportion of people are worse, is an inadvertent conspiracy against us. In response, we must constantly educate ourselves, be wary of some foods, hike, swim and cycle, and lift weights. Should living be so much work? But then, we must look at it as a form of self-absorption. Taking care of ourselves is a better form of self-obsession than boring people with tales from our past or being paranoid about digital privacy.

Attia accepts that genes play a major role in deciding our longevity and its quality, but our “cunning” can be as influential as the cards we have been dealt at birth. We need to eat like literates, develop aerobic and muscle strength, take help from some magic drugs and supplements, and try to be happy so that we do not commit the slow suicide widely known as “living it up”.

I’ve followed Attia’s pronouncements for a few years. Not long ago, he had a theological disdain for fast carbs and was a believer in the ‘keto diet’ and intermittent fasting, which deplete the body of glucose reserves and induce it to burn fat. But now Attia has a more compassionate view—not towards sugar, but towards the diversity of our bodies and the fact that not everyone can handle hardship just because they want a long healthy life. Also, we cannot be sure of anything about food. On nutrition, “…we know relatively little with complete certainty,” Attia writes. But what we know is enough to link excess consumption with early death or a prolonged joyless old age.

Modern medicine lulls people into a false sense of well-being through biomarkers that emerge from blood tests. For instance, medicine classifies people as non-diabetic, pre-diabetic or diabetic. People are deemed fine, until one day they are not. But they were headed for trouble all along. “It is absurd and harmful to treat this disease like cold or a broken bone, where you either have it or you don’t; it’s not binary,” Attia writes. So too with cardiovascular disease. It’s a spectrum. Most people deemed fine are probably already in the early stages of the disease, headed for a day when they will suddenly become heart patients, or fall dead.

The terms “good cholesterol” and “bad cholesterol” that are given to LDL and HDL, Attia points out, are meaningless. In fact, what he is most interested in your blood report to assess if you actually risk early mortality are two markers in blood most Indians don’t order from the lab—the levels of apolipoprotein B and a lipoprotein called LP (a). The level of LP (a) in your blood stream is genetically predetermined, and if it is high, there is nothing you can do about it. Even so, Attia feels that knowledge is useful. Once you know you are at high risk, you should then try to lower other markers, even to the level of an infant’s.

Apart from food, what alters one’s fate is what Attia calls “the most powerful longevity drug”—exercise. He does rigorous exercises and is yet to develop compassionate views on it. He hates the fact that people think exercise is a broad ambiguous thing. It is a set of specific things, each with a distinct function. To live long and well, he says, one has to develop a large capacity to ingest oxygen, through aerobic exercises like running, cycling and swimming, one has to build muscle strength by lifting weights and increase grip strength by dangling from a bar, etc, and one must improve the body’s flexibility and stability.

In our ‘cunning’ to survive our civilization, its food and the mediocrity of modern medicine, Attia says we must include drugs. Not all medicine, he feels, need the inconvenience of disease. He mentions two with hope, rapamycin and metformin. Rapamycin is usually prescribed to those who have undergone an organ transplant, to stop the body from attacking the new organ. Metformin is prescribed to people diagnosed with diabetes. They appear to have a beneficial effect on healthy people, too. They are not yet cleared by regulators as health supplements, but rich bio-hackers in the US might already be taking them. And there are other such crypto-molecules that hold a lot of promise.





We must end the life-altering power of a college-degree


2023-04-10

There are allegations that two college degrees held by Narendra Modi are not authentic. But the Prime Minister is not in trouble, because somehow he is never in trouble. In this particular case, even if the degrees he is said to hold are fake, I am glad he will not face its consequences.

The way people scorn politicians for not going to college, it is as though they possessed some great intelligence or skill to walk into college. It is particularly amusing when those who scorn are graduates in the humanities. It takes little effort to get an arts degree. Most people got into college because they filled an application form and paid fees. And most emerged from college with no special skill or knowledge. You may argue that the controversy is not over the value of college, but in the deception, if any. But any Indian faking an arts degree is only responding to an evil force. The prestige attached to college degrees is a caste system. Educated Indians are complicit in this, for it is they who manufactured the stigma for college-illiterates, which is one of two reasons that millions of Indians are forced to produce fake certificates. The other reason is the absurd requirement of a college degree for so many jobs that do not require such education.

The contempt for Modi’s possible lack of education is, in part, a reaction to his party’s growing reputation for suppressing dissent with disproportionate force. But the glorification of college education by the sort of people whose only achievement is that their parents sent them to college is also a form of bullying. Maybe of a worse kind because it has the sheen of virtue.

In its campaign to make Modi pay for his probable fake degrees, the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) has resorted to calling him “illiterate”. AAP’s campaigns are usually very sharp and effective, but this is going to work against the party. It is influenced by the high educational qualifications of Arvind Kejriwal, who is an engineer, and his party’s success in improving the quality of government schools. But calling Modi “Illiterate” is the same as making fun of most Indians. It reinforces the shame of poverty or poor exam-taking skills.

Often, when organizations ask for a college degree, they only seek an easy way to disqualify most job applicants. This is unfair because most Indians get a bad start in life and their educational levels, especially if they have been to school, do not represent their ability to do a particular job. Why then must India promote a system that rewards people for their mere luck?

If AAP were truly a humanitarian force, it would continue to provide high-quality free education to the poor, and also campaign to end the requirement of college education for government jobs that do not require college education. The US has begun to do exactly this. A few days ago, Barack Obama tweeted, “Here’s an example of a smart policy that gets rid of unnecessary college degree requirements and reduces barriers to good paying jobs. I hope other states follow suit.” He linked an article which points out some US states are easing requirements and opening up opportunities for non-college-educated workers. America used to be a place where a person who did not go to college could still earn a decent living on a factory floor and find social respect, too. Also, he had an opportunity to rise in his company. But then, the rise of tech and jobs that required people to appear sophisticated, and a job shortage that led to new ways of eliminating applicants resulted in a huge rush for college degrees, which eventually increased the cost of higher education. American politicians and private companies are responding to end the absurdity.

Many US tech majors have got rid of the need for college degrees in some positions. Since 2011, American billionaire Peter Thiel has run a grant that bribes young people to drop out of college and start a business.

India’s new education policy has elements that are bold and smart. It widens the meaning of education beyond sciences and languages, which have long put many at a disadvantage. The policy has brought some actual skills like carpentry into the ambit of mainstream school education. Also, it proposes to enable a person to leave college midterm and resume the pursuit of a degree later. But what India needs to do is eliminate the life-altering power of a piece of paper called the college degree.

There can be some arguments against this. Thousands apply for every vacancy in India. We have heard stories of how hundreds of post-graduates, even engineers, applied for the job of a peon. If that is the case, there may be mayhem if the filter of a college degree is removed. But then, this is not a fair reason to discriminate against those who could not attend college. Let there be mayhem. If 1,000 postgraduates apply for a job, let 10,000 school dropouts apply too. In the end, for jobs that require some aptitude and not technical knowledge, employers must devise effective ways of picking candidates instead of creating a meaningless caste system.

Another argument can be that if people have an incentive to go to college, they may discover something useful. What is so great about the world outside college? Most jobs are joyless. College, for all its flaws, is less dreary than the typical entry-level job. So what is so wrong in sending Indians in pursuit of a piece of paper if this pursuit is better than what they would endure otherwise?

Ideally, a society should fully fund the pursuit of knowledge, but separate it from the job market. The joy of discovery or even idleness in college has value, but that does not justify granting an unfair advantage to some who get to go there.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, Decoupled.





Brace for the defamation of AI by those who missed out


2023-04-16

A few days ago, sentient luminaries signed yet another letter to protect us from artificial intelligence (AI). Their list is meant to make a journalist like me say, “it includes Elon Musk, Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak and some highly respected AI scientists.” They want a “pause” on the progress of AI for six months for humankind to evaluate its risks.

There is a general perception that people who have excelled in one area make sense in all areas, or that when they say something in the public interest, they do so with no ulterior motive. As expected, the luminaries have inspired thousands to add their signatures to the letter. It is a part of a larger movement to stall the progress of AI by triggering anxiety and invoking a form of logic called ethics. It is a phase every new technology goes through. The science is at first underrated, then some influential people celebrate it with evangelical fervour, ordinary people across the world believe it, a happy hysteria grows, and then a camp of disenchanted influential figures claim to worry that the new tech will harm people if it is not regulated. Inevitably, an ethics professor from an Ivy League college will condemn the tech and some guys will make a documentary. Expect all of this to unfold.

Last November, Openai revealed an AI chatbot called ChatGPT and demonstrated to an awestruck world that an advanced programme can imitate human communication and perform tasks of elaborate human expression in microseconds. In my line of work, ChatGPT reminds me of charlatans who wing it through life. As a research assistant, it has been untrustworthy. In that way, it does seem human. Its incompetence is probably temporary. In many other ways, ChatGPT is extraordinary. It is already an alternative to Google, something unthinkable even a year ago. In response, Google is improving its own AI, in what must be the new arms-race for survival. All this is making some luminaries and ordinary people anxious, though probably for different reasons.

The letter, an initiative of Future of Life, a non-profit that seeks to restrain technology from destroying us, asks, “Should we develop nonhuman minds that might eventually outnumber, outsmart, obsolete and replace us? Should we risk loss of control of our civilization? Such decisions must not be delegated to unelected tech leaders.” The letter is annotated by a visual icon of serious research— numbers in brackets that denote “notes and reference”. For instance, the very first line: “AI systems with human-competitive intelligence can pose profound risks to society and humanity, as shown by extensive research [1]…” But among what is cited as ‘research’ are tired opinions, like an essay that laments the disproportionate size of Western material in machine-learning, and the views of an AI alarmist who thinks machines could misunderstand our instructions and kill us all.

The letter is foolish, so why bother? A top-tier sanctimonious movement in the US is usually both sophisticated and opaque. Movements that successfully portrayed social media as a cause for all liberal traumas, for example. This letter, in its clumsiness, reveals how a moral argument is fabricated, pressure is manufactured and public anxiety is triggered. The driving forces behind the movement to undermine AI could be a complex mix of the these factors:

One, billionaires who missed out on AI and want time to catch up, or want to force those who have an AI monopoly to be more transparent, or want to contain it by creating public opinion against the tech, making it easy for governments to intervene and regulate it.

Two, the jealousy of peers, which is an underrated evil.

Three, anxiety. One type emerges from people who are prone to it; they find newer and newer things to be anxious about. The other type of anxiety is unique to Western billionaires. This problem arises from the fact that they can’t be oppressed by humans. But then every human has a quota of oppression that they must endure to feel human. The only things that can oppress US billionaires are disease, insurrection, aliens and paranormal machines, the reason they tend to develop exaggeration notions of their dangers.

Their movement against AI, as with the movement against Facebook, will couch the disgruntlement and self-interest of a few in ethics. That is why the most amusing part of the letter is this: “Contemporary AI systems are now becoming human-competitive at general tasks, and we must ask ourselves: Should we let machines flood our information channels with propaganda and untruth?” Such a question often emerges from those who are right in the middle of propaganda themselves and probably do not realise it. It is time to accept that human communication is almost entirely propaganda. If we spoke only facts, we’d mostly be silent.

“Society has hit pause on other technologies with potentially catastrophic effects on society,” the letter says, citing human cloning, germ-line modification, gain-of-function research and eugenics. This is just not true. Humans have not made progress with controversial technologies not because of an ethical pause, but because the science was flawed or progress very hard. Human cloning has stalled chiefly because breakthroughs have been rare and its failure rates too high. Even nations like China, which are not restrained by Western ethical movements, have not made much progress. AI is past the stage when it can be controlled by activism. Not everything about this might be good, but the future is mostly going to be exciting.

The author asserts that this column has not been written by AI. Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, Decoupled.





Why the GOAT in sports is usually old or dead or both


2023-04-23

Sachin Tendulkar turns 50 today, I would like to draw your attention to something that appears to be about him but is about everything else. Every field has its “greatest” who are usually old, or dead, or both. There is a reason for that and it may not be honourable.

The word ‘greatest’ is commonly used in reference to Sachin Tendulkar, but in a manner that is the opposite of what it is meant to convey. He is considered “one of the greatest batsmen” in the history of cricket, which is also a way of saying he is not the greatest. He has been called “one of the greatest” halfway up his career. Many of his peers who shared that status, who were once considered his equals, did not endure.

I do not deny the wisdom in the expression ‘one of the greatest’. It suggests that there are the mere greats, and then there are some immortal giants, and these giants are equals because at their level, the objective measures of ranks collapse. There can only be artistic ambiguity. I accept that. But then there is one man who is considered “the greatest batsman in the history of the game”—Don Bradman. Considered by whom? By cricketers and sports intellectuals; and as a consequence by cricket fans who may not have seen a single delivery faced by him. It has become a sort of decorum to say Bradman is the best. Only for the sake of journalistic rigour is he described as “among the greatest”.

In many fields, the GOAT (the greatest of all time) has that quality. He is from another time, very old or dead. Football has Pele. Tennis has Rod Laver. Literature and films in every country have their own.

They are the “greatest” not because people know their craft intimately. They are the greatest because they are not relevant to the generation that has been asked to form an opinion about who is the GOAT. What happens is that in every generation, athletes do not have the heart to deem one of their own greater than all of them, so they deem an old distant legend, one who is well past competition, the GOAT, and this goes on with every generation, reinforcing the mascot of an ancient time as “the greatest ever”, an astonishing historical lie that is perpetuated by the jealousy of peers, the romanticism of distance and the condescension the young have for the old and the living have for the dead.

This is the same reason why when “Indian writers in English” are asked who is “the greatest Indian writer in English,” they say R.K. Narayan. Because R.K. Narayan is not a peer, he is beyond competition. It is safe to vote him the GOAT. In fact, I feel most contemporary Indian writers have not even read him. Some writers used to claim the GOAT is Kiran Nagarkar, also a safe choice. Language writers in every region of India have their own GOATs and it is never their peers, but some grand old figure who is not competition. If you take a poll of contemporary Indian filmmakers to find ‘the greatest Indian film director ever’, we know the winner would be Satyajit Ray.

This is like the political phenomenon where “senior leaders” of the Congress want the Gandhi family alone to lead the party because they do not have the heart to back one of their contemporaries. There exist ways to assess just how great sporting legends were in their time. Statistician Charles Davis compared the performances of legends with their peers and expressed their exceptionality as a standard deviation. Standard deviation is broadly a measure of how far a statistical reading is from its category average. In basketball, when points per game were considered, Michael Jordan’s standard deviation from the mean performance of his era was 3.4. In football, when goals per game were considered, Pele stood out at 3.7. Don Bradman was the most exceptional when all major sports were taken into account—his batting average made him stand well apart from his peers, with a standard deviation measure of 4.4.

But then, this does not tell the whole story. The GOATs may have been exceptional compared to their peers, but that does not assure them their greatness when compared to contemporary greats. There are some ways of arguing this point. For instance, we can say that Bradman never faced the sort of bowling Tendulkar had to face, or that Bradman never made difficult tours to unfamiliar pitches like those in India where his vaunted averages would have collapsed. Also, even though it is a myth that there was no off-side rule during Pele’s time, the versions of that rule in his time favoured strikers, and he may not have scored as many goals if he played today. But all these arguments are pointless because we can never be certain of all the factors. There is one indicator though that suggests the GOATs of another era, in some sports if not all, might be far more ordinary than we think.

Consider the extraordinary achievement of Roger Bannister who in 1954 became the first person to run a mile in under four minutes, or at least the first person to be recorded doing so. This was the final frontier of middle-distance running, but soon after his feat, several people ran a mile under four minutes. Today, the world record is about 17 seconds faster. This is not merely a result of ‘inspiration’, training and nutrition. Instead, what it suggests is that a sporting accomplishment of a time is first a consequence of social privilege. As more people get opportunities to participate in sports, true geniuses arise. And they show that the old greats were only best in their small circles.

Whether Tendulkar is greater than Bradman is an uninteresting question. The most interesting question in every sport is never asked: Who is the second best?

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’.





A Republic of South India is not entirely unthinkable


2023-05-01

The Bharatiya Janata Party torments its rivals in a few ways. The least painful is when it wins elections fairly. Everything else involves a heavy hand. Other parties have accused the BJP of buying off their politicians. It got Congress leader Rahul Gandhi disqualified from Parliament, they say, after a BJP functionary won a court ruling against him for “criminal defamation” of the ‘Modi’ surname; before that, it got a Congress politician arrested for getting Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s middle name wrong; also, the BJP uses governors appointed by it to paralyse states it does not run. Several political parties also accuse the BJP of using the Enforcement Directorate to fix its rivals. Delhi’s deputy chief minister Manish Sisodia was arrested on a corruption charge that they claim is bogus. Meanwhile, they contend, BJP leaders who are accused in financial scams do not face any heat. And that the Gujarat government, which is controlled by the BJP, has misused its “privilege” to acquit men convicted of rape and murder.

None of this has affected the party’s performance in elections, especially in North India. Through elections, legal loopholes and litigation, the BJP has become a formidable political force. It has been trying to make inroads in the south and has succeeded only in Karnataka, which goes to polls in May. But several projections show the BJP performing poorly. In the south, the BJP is a foreboding to many. If its political tactics continue, something has to give. I have a theory that the south may ask why it can’t be free of Delhi.

At the moment, the idea of southern states threatening to secede or even form a political bloc is far-fetched, but an emotional foundation already exists for an extraordinary revolt in the future. Just one element is missing.

The five southern states, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and Karnataka, have a vague sameness about them and a clear distinction from the north. They have their own riparian, lingual and ethnic discords, and within these states, there are caste and religious divisions, but they have always had a collective grouse—the north’s political domination of India. This wariness is a reason why when Modi visits Tamil Nadu, he needs to speak in English, even to the poor who come to see him. It may sound odd for a nationalistic prime minister to speak in English to Indians, but he has to endure it. Hindi remains a symbol of the north, and the conceit of the south is that it finds English more palatable. This has no emotional basis anymore, but the south is not going to make things easy for the north.

The political swag of the south ensures that there may be no such being as the ‘Indian nationalist’, there is only the North Indian nationalist.

Traditionally, South Indian politicians have disliked the powers of the central government, especially when a single party has controlled it. Like the Congress, the BJP too has harassed states. Recently, Tamil Nadu passed a resolution against its governor for stalling bills passed by the state’s legislature. The state’s chief minister, M.K. Stalin has spoken out against the BJP’s ways. A few days ago, he wrote a letter asking all states that are not governed by the BJP to pass similar resolutions against their governors, the appointees accused by BJP rivals of frustrating states that do not toe the Centre’s policies.

In 2022, when the Centre questioned the habit of some states to give away freebies to people, Tamil Nadu finance minister, Palanivel Thiagarajan told a magazine, “Either you must have a constitutional basis to say what you are saying, in which case we all listen, or you must have special expertise… or you must have a Nobel Prize or something that tells us you know better than us. Or, you must have a performance track record…”

A few days ago, when Modi visited Telangana, the state’s Chief Minister K. Chandrasekhar Rao did not attend Modi’s public events. They insulted each other. Major politicians from Kerala, Andhra and Karnataka, too, have expressed their dislike for the Centre’s muscle-flexing.

But no one of any significance in the south has, in recent times, talked of seceding from India. And that is not only because it might be a crime. There is no emotional support for the idea. But that could change if three things happen. One, the BJP grows stronger and stronger in the north, continuing to repress other political parties and the states it does not govern. The second factor is a major economic shock that could be attributed to the central government, something like ‘demonetization’ or even a major recession. The third is the rise of a South Indian strongman who could use these factors to ask a disturbing question: What does the south lose by leaving the north?

Such a strongman may head an unambiguously Hindu party, and be a popular figure across the five states, like some South Indian actors have been in the past. He might be a man who understands that concepts like ‘federalism’ are too fancy to transmit to people and that a simpler story of villains would work. He could follow the very blueprint used by the BJP to tell an influential story and gain political stardom.

There can be an argument that no matter what the circumstances, nothing can take on the idea of India. But the fact is no one knows what keeps India together. The quickest way to get Indian intellectuals to bloviate is to ask them what keeps India together. I have heard “English”, “cricket’ and “Bollywood”. I think there are no reasons. A nation is simply a habit. As time goes by, it becomes a stronger habit that is harder to break. But then South India, too, is a habit.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





Having a decent boss could have lifelong consequences


2023-05-07

I got lucky there in my first job. My first boss, Ingrid Albuquerque, was a seasoned editor of glossy publications. I was 20 years old. She was generous to me, saved me from trouble, and at the time she was the only person who was materially useful. I sensed she could have an outsized influence on my professional life, a reason why the most thrilling part of my life then was waiting for her couriers, or phone calls. She died last week after a heart attack. In the end, even though she was my boss only for a year, in that brief time she was many times more useful to me than I ever was to her. In fact, I don’t think I had done anything for her.

A piece of nonsense I hear frequently from bosses is that they aim to “hire people who are smarter than me.” It is wise, but the opposite of what a boss who says stuff like that does. Rather, bosses primarily tend to hire people who make them feel secure, which often means someone who is not exceptional, or they hire a nerd who has narrow domain genius and will never climb the management rungs, or they hire someone who is too young to be a threat of any kind. So, the calibre of the boss becomes the upper limit of talent, and every rung of the hierarchy below them is guarded the same way by smaller ringleaders. As a result, a smart young person so often has to report to managers who are not natural leaders, or who are in fact very bad at their jobs. This in itself need not be hell, but usually is.

Young men are routinely humiliated by middle-aged bosses who see them as sexual competition or who just resent them for their youth. The Me-Too movement showed one way in which bosses can degrade the lives of young women. The movement is also a hint that bosses can hurt their subordinates in other subtle ways, ways that are neither obvious nor criminal.

The humanitarian potential of a boss, at every rung of an office set-up, is immense. This does not mean he or she needs to go out of the way to do good. There exists that type, too, and they are the amateur bosses. They impart too much articulation of intent and too much do-gooding, which often leads to trouble. I think the best bosses are those who are primarily good at their jobs, and whose decency is in the fact that they do not do anything indecent or petty. That alone is enough to improve the lives of their subordinates.

Despite the fortune of being hired by Albuquerque, my first day as a full-time journalist was a disaster. There was a senior writer I had to report to. In the first two hours, she had taken me under her wings and even called up her contacts to fix appointments for a story I had planned. By tea time, I thought adults in offices were generally good people.

But then disaster struck. In the middle of a chat, the senior writer asked me to guess her age.

She looked old, I thought, but my instinct told me that I should reduce her age a bit. I said “63”; I always used odd numbers that were not divisible by five to sound precise.

It turned out that she was around 45 years old. I didn’t understand how that was very different from 63. The senior writer started yelling at me.

I wondered aloud on her “idiosyncrasy”. I used to use words like ‘idiosyncrasy’ in conversations back then.

She froze. She probably thought I was calling her an idiot through a longer word. She yelled some more and called up her contacts in Madras to warn them about me. I had that effect on many people at the time—I would say something and they would start screaming. But this case was particularly bad because she was going to be my bureau chief. But when Albuquerque got to know, she ensured I did not have to report to the slighted writer again. She promised to protect me from people who seemed crazier than me.

When Albuquerque hired me, she did not know I was in a bad way financially. I was in the middle of a charlatan diploma course in journalism, fending for myself. I had tried to liberate myself by looking for a job, but newspapers in Madras, despite their idealism, said they would only hire interns at no salary.

After Albuquerque gave me a paid job, I went to the principal of the college I attended and asked for my fee back, as I would not be staying back for the rest of the academic session. The principal was yelling long after I left his room. It was a period of my life when I realized character was entirely blood pressure.

Often, you cannot look at a person and tell he is on the brink, or even what the brink is. Bosses need not know about the situation of those who report to them; maybe they should not know too much. But merely by being fair, not even generous, just fair, they can transform many lives.

Ingrid Albuquerque did not know much about my life all those years ago. But, once she drafted me in, she made it her mission to get me a fair shot. It helped me grow some muscles at the very start of my writing career and prepared me to leave that job for better places.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





Why India seems short of sympathy for its middle class


2023-05-14

Nirvana Country is an almost beautiful island in the vast dismal ugliness of Gurugram. Some residents call it “Unitech’s folly” because the colony has broad tree-lined pathways, pretty parks with flower beds and little green mounds, and there are other hints of builder generosity, which is rare in India. Public life here appears to be good. Happy old men amble in groups talking about the importance of authoritarianism; their wives sit in a circle and sing; an American with a mohawk teaches teenaged girls karate; and some boys are so posh they can’t bowl. The place was even prettier about 15 years ago. So, at the time, when Unitech announced the making of Nirvana II, just a few kilometres away, hundreds rushed to book villas.

The builder was to begin delivery of the homes around 2012, but no one has got possession yet. The builder has since perished, two of its promoters in jail for fraud, and its management has been taken over by bureaucrats. Hundreds of people who sank their savings in the project or had taken huge loans that they still service, have joined lakhs of Indians who trusted various marquee builders, but are yet to get possession of their houses.

The buyers have been seeking the attention of courts, politicians, regulators and the media. Among them, those who booked anything better than cheap housing are at a particular disadvantage. There is no real sympathy for them. In a nation where the bar for what constitutes misery is very high, a delay in the possession of a villa does not count as a misfortune. Judges, bureaucrats, activists, journalists and empathetic beings do not consider the issue trivial, but when set against what an average Indian endures, the completion of a half-dead residential project so that some people can get their villas is not a priority.

There would even be a quarrel over the use of the term ‘middle-class’ for villa-owners. By income and assets, they do not represent the median Indian household. For some reason, development economists and their friends revel in the fact the true Indian middle class is much poorer than most people who use terms like ‘middle class’. But then an economic class can exist independent of its nation’s plight, exhibiting a set of behaviours that are uniform across the world. My own definition of the middle-class is anyone who must work to sustain their present lifestyle; also anyone whose spending confidence depends on a regular income. Seen this way, the middle classes, across the world, share common features. Just that in rich countries, the middle-class form a majority, and in poor countries, they do not, making them politically insignificant, which denies them an important form of sympathy: the political consideration. Being middle-class in a poor country can have some aspects of wealth, but it is a far more fragile condition than the state of being wealthy. A shock like a home-buying decision gone wrong can have disastrous consequences.

Aditya Mishra is a finance executive who invested in a villa in Nirvana II in 2009. Soon after he paid the down payment, construction began. Typically in such projects, payments are staggered and linked to completion of phases. The initial work was brisk. Over the first five years, he paid up about 85% of the villa’s cost of ₹1.8 crore. This means, apart from sinking in his own savings, he has been paying an EMI of over ₹1 lakh every month for the past several years. But the villa that was to be delivered in 2012 is still not his.

The unlucky buyers of Nirvana II have formed a tight group and have been pleading with regulators and bureaucrats. They are careful never to use the word “villas”. Instead, Aditya told me, they use the expression “our dream homes”.

On some pleading expeditions, they take their spouses and parents along to demonstrate the emotional nature of their “dream home”. The buyers have also asked their banks to restructure their loans, which is a euphemism to permit defaults or reduce the financial burden in some way. But the banks have said that their credit-ratings, open for all to see, will take such a beating that they may never get a bank loan again.

India’s lack of compassion for him frustrates Aditya, but there is a particular part that irritates him. It comes from his peers. They say he is not in such a bad way because property prices have tripled, or maybe even quadrupled in Gurgaon from the time he had paid the down-payment for his 360 square-yard villa. He says when you consider the money spent on the project over the past 15 years, the returns are not so attractive, even if he might one day get possession. And what is the price one can put on the failed dream to his own corner of the world.

Some of the elderly who wished to live their last lap in their own villas with their families have died fighting for what was their own. Families have aged since they made the fateful error to move to Nirvana II and their children are almost adults today, ready to fly away.

Aditya says it is all so cruel; buyers had faith in Nirvana II because banks had endorsed the project, effectively. So, Aditya asks, why should only individual home-owners pay the price, why not have these banks share their misery? Instead, banks continue to make money off people who have been cheated of their homes for nearly 15 years.

Yet, their pain and rage cannot move the nation. Sorrows, in India, have to submit to a decorum. They need tremendous reasons to be considered sorrows.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





Why a debate rages over whether ice-cream is healthy


2023-05-21

In April, a story emerged that for many years scientists have suppressed an astonishing finding—that ice-cream might be good for health. The Atlantic magazine ran a story headlined, ‘The Ice-cream conspiracy’ by David Merritt Johns, who is generally described as a “public health historian.” His story begins in 2018. The research of a doctoral student at Harvard Medical School led him to the conclusion that, “Among diabetics, eating half a cup of ice cream a day was associated with a lower risk of heart problems.” The finding seemed so joyful, which is rare in nutritional science, that his seniors asked him to check again. But the health benefits of ice-cream survived all rigorous assaults. Harvard downplayed the results.

That was not the first time a scientific study at Harvard linked ice-cream to health benefits; 20 years earlier, researcher Mark A. Pereira studied data from 1985 tracing the effect of food on the hearts of over 5,000 young adults. Low-fat dairy, the data suggested, had a good effect. It was interesting news at the time, but not surprising. The shock was that low-fat dairy in the form of sweet dessert that consisted “mainly of ice cream” had a much larger beneficial effect by reducing the chances of overweight people turning pre-diabetic.

After The Atlantic’s story, a flood of stories appeared titled, in one form or another, ‘Can ice cream be healthy?’ In journalism, if you see a question as headline, it means the writer does not know the answer because nobody does. These stories had the excitement of unspoken hope—that ice cream is not only fine but beneficial, even if it is eaten daily in small portions. Usually, something worth living for can also kill you. But then the scientific community did not wish to admit this was true. That was, in fact, the central message of The Atlantic story—not that ice-cream might be beneficial, but that the hypothesis is unpopular among nutrition scientists. It has been tested many times and if any other food that did not contain sugar had accumulated this quantum of evidence, it would have been popular wisdom by now. But nutritionists and the media feel a sense of responsibility to play it down. It is something a vast majority of people would want to believe. But what if the science is wrong? The issue is similar to a finding that nicotine is good—it is said to be a magic drug of nature, but what people love is its delivery device, smoking, which can kill us with more certainty than nicotine can extend our lives.

Johns mentions a study in 2014 that found “higher intake of yogurt is associated with a reduced risk” for Type-2 diabetes, “whereas other dairy foods and consumption of total dairy are not.” One part of the statement is not surprising. Yoghurt is a superhero among foods and no one questions anything good said about it. But the other part is intriguing. It was not true that the study found no other dairy food that could reduce risk of diabetes. It had found that ice-cream did just that. In fact, its good effect on one aspect of health was more consistent than yoghurt’s. Imagine ice-cream being healthier than yoghurt—some people might want to harm their parents.

Scientists wondered in what ways they can disprove ice-cream’s “health benefits”. The strongest lead they had was that nutritional research is almost entirely based on what people said they ate and how much, and people tend to lie. Scientists wondered what if in the cohort whose statements form the basis of the 2014 study, those who developed precursors to diabetes, like hypertension, had reduced their ice-cream intake but did not report it, and healthy people saw no need to reduce theirs? This would mean it was not ice-cream that made people healthy, but good health sustaining or increasing its consumption. Researchers tweaked the data to adjust for this. The health aura of ice-cream dimmed by half, but even so, it appeared to be as healthy as yoghurt.

You may think all this is fine, but what is the truth? Is ice-cream beneficial or not? Can it protect us from diabetes and heart disease?

There is something in ice-cream’s favour, but don’t stop reading yet. In what most of us consider ‘real ice-cream’, the tastier stuff which is made of dairy, there would be a “milk-fat-globule membrane” that sheaths the fat. This membrane and the fat itself would ensure that the sugar in it is released into the blood stream slowly. According to modern nutrition, prevention of diabetes and heart disease is all about slowing down that release. The rate at which food becomes blood sugar has a standardized scale, the Glycemic Index. As Johns points out, ice-cream has a lower index than brown rice. Also, ice-ream has vitamins and protein.

But then, this is the sort of paragraph in mass media that conscientious scientists dread. It is not factually wrong, but what if it inspires people to make ice-cream their main course? Actually, a “Youtuber” did just that, and he lost weight, but he started hating ice-cream after that.

I am on the side of scientists who want to be absolutely certain before they admit that ice-cream is healthier than we thought. Because, when it comes to nutrition, science does not know enough. There could be an unknown reason that influenced findings. Maybe those who don’t eat ice-cream end up eating worse things. So, it is not that ice-cream is healthy; it is that the modern world has invented worse junk.

But the most interesting revelation of the ice-cream conspiracy is that even in science, we have gatekeepers who decide what should be canonized as ‘proven fact’ and what should be defamed as a wrong signal.





The world and even India have left Mumbai far behind


2023-05-28

About eight years ago when the first Mumbai Metro line opened, the passengers gawked like ancient rustics at the swanky air-conditioned cars, and the automatic doors. It was all so new to them. Purely from their reactions, they did not look like residents of one of the largest urban economies of the world.

This January, two more sections of two more metro lines opened, and the reactions of the people were the same because the people of Mumbai are still not used to what is basic infrastructure not only in the urban world but also in urban India. Most of Mumbai still travels in humid trains that cannot be air-conditioned because commuters spill out of the cars, dangling all the way, some of them falling to their deaths almost every day. In fact, most of Mumbai is not used to air-conditioned public buses or even taxis. Its traffic congestion today is among the worst in the world because it does not have enough roads. It is only now that some infrastructural projects are nearing completion, or starting.

This was once a great city, but has regressed so much that today, even by Asian standards, it is merely a small town with a lot of people in it. Even in the form of modern urban entertainment, it has nothing beyond food. Yes, women are generally safer on the roads, if you do not count the New Year’s eve.

Life was, for long, hard in the city. It was always a gigantic urban design flaw. But, like most great cities, it had a right to make you suffer. Because it offered something in return. There was an unspoken agreement between “Bombay” as it was called once, and its people, especially its new people. In return for its flaws, Bombay offered a way of life that was not available anywhere else in India or in many parts of the world.

If you consider the great cities of the world like New York or even Shanghai and Bangkok, they do compress space and suffocate, but in return they offer the joy of a modern city that is unique in the world or at least in the region. In that way, there is meaning to the congestion. People flock to a city in large numbers, or remain, for a reason. Mumbai offers nothing unique anymore. Not even higher pay when compared to other big Indian cities.

I was 21 when I moved to Bombay and by my first evening I accepted that my home would be a debasing place. But in all other ways, life in the city was better than the places that raised me, and that was not only because I was single. Bombay, in the mid-90s was still many notches above any other Indian city. It had uninterrupted electricity supply, which was a novel experience for an Indian. Even though it did not have a great road-length, its traffic congestion was less than in Madras. I saw concrete roads for the first time. There were several bars, and night clubs. The girls were, to borrow an expression from Madras, “broad-minded”. India was and is a republic against fun, but Bombay was not. In important ways, Bombay was not even India. There were the sort of people here whom you could not find anywhere else. The cultural elite and patrons of art were distinct.

All the wondrous things the world was inventing then came to India through Bombay first. The mobile and internet coverage was the best in India. The stray dogs, too, were large, well-fed and happier than anywhere else in the nation. Except for space, there was abundance.

Yet, even then it was not hard to see that Bombay was deteriorating from the time when the self-interest of the British, Parsis and Gujaratis created it. Bombay was a city that had a shot at greatness. But then it was impoverished by petty men who did not have the vision even to be corrupt in a grand way. The people of modern Mumbai are like children from wealthy families who have been abducted by a syndicate of beggars, their genetic destiny altered into a third-rate life. Mumbai is an abduction, from our own rightful destiny.

Today, Mumbai offers nothing that other big cities don’t. Even its identity as “financial capital” is obsolete. What does the term even mean anymore? The biggest myth of the city even in its better days is the notion that everyone here is terribly busy with some important thing. You make a guy run behind a train, he will look busy. There is nothing more to it. It is just a mirage of urban preoccupation. What is left of Mumbai is only its suffocation and the petty sizes of homes. It certainly has improved in one aspect. Until about 10 years ago, only the rich could live in a building that had lawns and pools, and many billionaires did not have even that. But today the upper middle-class can find residential buildings that have a pool and a gym. Even in this redeeming quality, there is nothing special about Mumbai. Other cities offer better homes at half the price.

But then people don’t quit Mumbai easily. They search for reasons to explain this and find dubious virtues—like “energy”, which is just another word for “congestion”, and a phenomenal nonsense called “spirit of Mumbai”, which this column has explained before is merely people going to work against all odds because their homes are worse than their offices.

The real reason people find it hard to quit Mumbai is in the notion of home. A home has two powerful elements. Family and familiarity. Mumbai is just too familiar for those who are used to it. That is why the location of home is a matter of great luck, like the people who fill it. For some people, the location of home is a curse.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’.





Why nobody finds the opulent new Parliament vulgar


2023-06-04

The new Indian parliament is the opposite of the average member of Parliament. The new parliament is modern, luxurious and in parts even opulent. The standard Indian politician looks inexpensive and ancient. The new parliament befits lawmakers in identical black coats, the formal assembly that is common in the West, China and several Asian nations that do not rebel against the cultural triumph of the suit. Like godmen, who claim “you are me and I am you” but dress up precisely to emphasise he is not you, Indian politicians too claim to dress to represent the common man but do not look like us or the poor at all. The general sartorial objective of Indian politicians is to continue what the first generation of Indian politicians did—the fancy dress of austerity. So why is it that they are not afraid of the opulence of the new parliament?

Why are they not concerned that its grandeur may irritate the average voter? They are right in not being concerned, but what could be their logic? In a poor country where opulence has always been perceived as vulgar, why is Prime Minister Narendra Modi under no pressure to distance himself from the swankiness of the new building? In fact, during the inauguration of the parliament, he departed from the long tradition of prime ministers to pantomime submission to the president. In every way, it appeared that the new parliament building was Modi’s office and the president a special guest. Clearly, one of the most successful campaigners in free India’s history, who must know a lot about the average Indian’s psychology, thought it will not harm him at all if he fully owned the glamour of the new parliament.

Modi is not a man who takes the optics of affluence lightly. Once, during a speech, he mentioned how he had advised a group of automobile executives not to wear “suit-boot” when they went to meet farmers to negotiate the acquisition of their land. A few months after that, Modi’s own suit that had his name inscribed on it created a political storm, especially when a rumour took hold that the outfit cost a million rupees. His party made efforts to diffuse the situation, and the suit was eventually auctioned off for charity.

There is no doubt that there are spaces in India where opulence is vulgar—to the potent average Indian and not only to the conscientious beautiful people who speak on behalf of the poor. But there are spaces where opulence is not repulsive anymore; instead it represents hope. Like the new parliament. One reason for this is that the old parliament too was grand by Indian standards. All symbols of Indian democracy are housed in beautiful colonial buildings that are culturally alien to most Indians. So they are accustomed to grand buildings, which do not evoke any strong emotion unless they look Islamic or Christian.

Also, the average Indian gives a long rope to politicians. For instance, during campaigning, politicians sometimes land in helicopters in impoverished areas. For some reason, a convoy of Mercedes would repulse the voter, but not a chopper. Maybe there is a feeling that a chopper is rented while a Mercedes is owned. In any case, the voter is aware that a senior politician is a wealthy man. That even adds to his aura of his street-smartness which Indians value.

There is a more influential reason though why Modi’s full embrace of the new parliament’s grandeur was not risky. Indians have a new relationship with opulence and class, which they correctly identify as two different things. Contrary to the assumptions of India’s refined elite, the new average Indian is not repulsed by the opulence of modern buildings, like airports. Unlike the humane essay-writer, the average Indian does not whine that airports are so swanky while train stations are dilapidated. Instead, he is proud of opulent airports. Also, contrary to what the interpreters of national maladies say, the average Indian is not repulsed by billionaire homes. Maybe the poor do not differentiate between millionaire and billionaire homes, between Skodas and BMWs. There is another thing—in new India, wealth is not as vulgar as class.

There was a time when wealth and class were related; that is not the case anymore. The suave whose world is framed in English, the devotees of secular moralising religions, who have compassion for minorities, who cannot be argued against in public because they stand for all the right things, and who constantly try to reform all the boors—they represent an intellectual opulence, which is more repulsive to the average voter than any excess of wealth. Maybe the average Indian is not repulsed by wealth because people are not repulsed by what they themselves aspire. But people are repulsed by what is culturally alien and claims to be superior.

From this phenomenon emerges a modern crisis—the public resistance to “the right thing”. If I may repeat an argument this column has made before—people despise intellectuals so much that when the intellectuals do make sense, people hate sense itself.

The wealthiest and the most powerful people of new India, like billionaires, politicians, film and cricket stars are usually intellectually austere people. They say simple things, they are neither creators nor fans of high art; they are easy to understand and they are culturally rooted. In that way, they connect with a majority even when their display of wealth is vulgar. Maybe the average Indian then has travelled a great distance from the era of Mahatma Gandhi who took austerity to such lengths that he dressed in a way that was an exaggeration of the common man even in his time.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





There’s a future for boredom in the age of immersive fun


2023-06-11

Apple’s announcement of Vision Pro, a headset that will make videos resemble real life, gives me hope as I look forward to the future of wasting time. I do not call it ‘leisure’ or ‘relaxing after a hard day’s work’ or ‘me-time’ or any such comforting nonsense. Entertainment is not entirely a waste of time but mostly it is, and it is for that reason that I find it entertaining.

I am aghast at creators who promise to waste my time but do that so poorly that I have to go back to meaningful tasks. I am particularly disappointed with the predominant miners of our time like Facebook and Marvel and streaming channels. So I look forward to the future of augmented reality and virtual reality. Maybe life is going to be even more fun than it already is when entertainment becomes, as the tech industry says, “immersive”, as though other forms of entertainment are not immersive. A good book has to be, but my brief experience of virtual reality has educated me that there are levels of “immersive” and we will be blown.

The history of entertainment is a history of what could immerse people in an era. This might be the broad non-psychedelic chronology of immersive entertainment: Reality, religion, Shakespeare, novels, cinema, the internet, and now “augmented reality” and a certain romantic notion of actual reality.

As you can see, some old ways of immersion have endured. But I won’t overstate their power. Usually the old ways of immersive reality are no match for the new ways.

When a new technology emerges, commentators, especially in India, tend to talk about its social benefits, as though they are all that matter. For instance, when the internet and cell phones were arriving in India, there was much talk about how “the farmer” will now be able to find the “price of his crop”, as though that is the only thing a farmer seeks in his life. The people who speak on behalf of the poor appear to believe that fun is not a basic essential. In reality, the internet and phones took off among the masses because they offered entertainment. The first reactions to an impending Apple product line usually do not have social-messaging because they are meant for the affluent. Even so, the review of Vision Pro contained frequent mentions of how the device can transform education and even furniture assembly, perhaps saving the marriages, temporarily, of couples who have shopped at Ikea. There is very little mention of an arena of entertainment that’ll have a profound impact on the sales of the product—immersive, hyperrealistic pornography.

What is the future of boredom in the age of immersive entertainment? People speak of boredom as though it is a disease that they keep fighting. Yet, it is boredom that formed our personalities, and can continue to do so if we allow it to exist. I do not mean to consecrate boredom. Most of sorrow is boredom. But still, it is a living force in the core of our lives. It is there if we can see into the heart of our childhood. The central emotion of my childhood at least is boredom, which was only marginally better than trauma. I had so much time and nothing much to do. When I had something to do, it was even more boring than doing nothing, like studying for an exam. To save myself from boredom, I wrote a lot, which too was boring and tedious, but it was a different sort of boredom from idleness.

With every generation, the scope for boredom has reduced. It is much harder for children today to be bored in conventional ways. Their parents ensure they have something to do. In summer vacation, children are set to do extracurriculars, like the inmates of Tihar jail do under the supervision of a benevolent warden. They have many solutions to boredom that are entertaining. But this has raised their bar for stimulation; as a result, they are bored even as they immerse in entertainment. This is true for adults too. There are many ways of wasting time, but nothing really endures, and boredom finds a way to infect.

Everyone today is in the paradoxical trance of distraction. People set out to do some work, but then they check their mails, their social media feed, some reels maybe, then there is another mail. We keep scrolling. If you look at the world that is immersed in their phones, you may think they are this way because they are entertained by “content”. I don’t think so. I feel distraction is a form of boredom. That is the evolution of boredom—from being mindful of the present, which is far more dreary than monks claim, to having nothing to do, we have come to get bored of entertainment itself. Augmented reality is going to create new ways of forgetting reality but also new ways of getting bored.

Technology-ordained entertainment is strangely democratic. Even if a product is made for the affluent, it soon percolates down in some form to almost everyone. It is as though some American billionaires have unknowingly created a pact to keep the masses hooked to entertainment so that they don’t revolt. The same will happen to augmented reality. As Meta’s virtual-reality headset, and Apple’s Vision Pro become mainstream, they would inspire cheaper imitations, and soon even India’s poor would be hooked to the astonishing parallel world, maybe in a network of augmented-reality booths. Some kind soul will say that now the “farmer” can consult “a virtual doctor”.

Despite its lure, there is a surprising quality to augmented reality. It is exhausting. After about an hour, one wants to get back to the dullness of the primary illusion of human biology, which we call “reality”.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’.





The una-anarchist who saw evil in organized empathy


2023-06-18

As a columnist, I have never needed a reason, like a news angle or even your interest, to talk about things. So, to discuss the philosophy of a forgotten public figure, I did not need him to be in the news. But I had to wait for the death of a man widely known as ‘Unabomber’ to talk about his ideas. Between 1978 and 1995, he detonated crude bombs that he mailed or hand delivered across the US. He killed three and wounded more than 20. His victims were chosen by him, but he had no personal grudge against them. To him, they were symbols of technology and industrialization, which he blamed for the “disaster” that was modern life. His victims were mostly employees of universities and airlines, the reason why the US Federal Bureau of Investigation called him ‘Unabom’, which stood for “University-and-airlines bomber”. The media eventually named him Unabomber.

In 1995, he submitted a detailed premise for anarchy and his philosophical complaint against the modern world, titled, ‘Industrial Society and Its Future’ to the New York Times and Washington Post. He threatened that if they did not run his 35,000-word piece, he would kill more people. The papers decided to publish it in a collaboration. It would appear in the Washington Post as an eight-page insert, and the Times would share the cost of printing. It became an instant hit.

One reader of the essay called in to say that the style of prose and ideas appeared to belong to his brother Theodore Kaczynski, a gifted mathematician who became a recluse. Kaczynski turned out to be the Unambomber. He spent the rest of his life in prison, watching the world fare better than he had foretold. But then foretelling is where most writers go wrong. His portrait of modern people, especially the fellowship of do-gooders, struck many like a bolt.

On 10 June, he was found dead in his jail cell. He had killed himself, but officials are yet to reveal how. He was 81.

Here I present some of the ideas from his essay, which was a call to action to overthrow the entire “economic and technological basis of the present society”. Very early in the piece, Kaczynski observed, “One of the most widespread manifestations of the craziness of our world is leftism, so a discussion of the psychology of leftism can serve as an introduction to the discussion of the problems of modern society in general.” He perceived “the left” as “a psychological type.” He focused on “two psychological tendencies that underpin modern leftism.”

One of them was “feelings of inferiority,” such as “low self-esteem, feelings of powerlessness, depressive tendencies, defeatism, guilt, self-hatred, etc.” These feelings, he wrote, made leftists speak on behalf of other underdogs whom they discreetly deemed as beneath them. They did this not out of compassion as they claimed, but a subconscious craving for power. “Leftists tend to hate anything that has an image of being strong, good and successful… Art forms that appeal to modern leftish intellectuals tend to focus on sordidness, defeat and despair…”

Apart from “feelings of inferiority”, the other defining trait of “the left”, according to Kaczynski, was “oversocialization”.

‘Socialization’ is a formal term in psychology for the conditioning of children to follow rules. So his description is puzzling at first glance because “the left” does fight authority. He explained that society’s moral codes are hard to follow. Most of us break these moral codes through minor infractions. But some people are such conformists that they need moral reasons to be nasty, like despising a group of people. “In order to avoid feelings of guilt, they continually have to deceive themselves about their own motives and find moral explanations for feelings and actions that in reality have a non-moral origin.”

Kaczynski’s goal was to damage organized technology because it ruined nature. At some point, he had grown disenchanted with industrial addictions and wished to live at peace with nature, alone. But he had no peace because the advanced world encroached on his way of life. This was his true concern, and in his war against tech capitalism, he needed to muster moral rage on behalf of workers.

His disdain for “the left” or organized empathy emerged from his perception of it as a disease that infects and takes over all other revolutions. But, as the left is a fellowship of group-think who tend to ostracize those who do not agree with them, Kaczynski hoped that an early declaration of hostility towards them would make them disown his war, and he could then fight his battle without being appropriated by that “psychological type”.

I waited till Kaczynski’s death to discuss his manifesto because any other moment would have made it look like a tribute. I do not have a problem with tributes, but it would make him look like the originator of these thoughts. But the truth is that many of us arrived at some of his ideas before reading him. In fact, he is powerful for the only reason why any writer is—not because he is transformative, but because he has corroborated your own thoughts.

Kaczynski’s lawyer advised him to plead insanity to escape a death sentence. He refused, even though he had a good shot at being formally declared insane. Kaczynski is a reminder that making immense sense is not the same as sanity. Being mad is not about having some beliefs; it is about doing something about them. Sanity, it turns out, is the ability to do nothing much to further your convictions.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





The visual poverty of India’s rich has only gotten worse


2023-06-25

Light does not pass through the Indian maid, even though many Indians may want that. Light strikes her and is reflected back, creating one of the most inconvenient apparitions for them. That was always a property of light, but somehow there was a time, not long ago, when household helps knew how to be invisible. They would stay in the kitchen, merge with the backdrop, walk without noise, and never speak unless answering a question. But now they take breaks, talk on their phones with friends, and walk in the parks of their masters. As a result, they feature in India’s ongoing servant-master conflicts.

A few days ago, a somewhat affluent residential society in Bangalore issued a statement: ”Its difficult to see them (maids) hang out everywhere in the park, amphitheatre and gazebos. Residents can feel uncomfortable when being surrounded by maids everywhere we walk… Cooks, carpenters, plumbers sit on the sofa at the building reception. Most of us have probably stopped sitting on the sofas by now…” When this leaked, there was familiar outrage. India appears to be such a fair place on social media. Many pointed out that “the maids” were “human too”. I find this taunt odd. The upper-class knows “servants” are humans. In fact, they have problems only with humans. If, say, deer walked around their parks, amphitheatre and gazebos, and sat on their sofas, people would find it very cute.

What the residential society was trying to hint at was that the poor bring down the aesthetics of a place. And because of mobile phones, they are not only seen but also heard —laughing, crying, fighting, loving. They also hog the meagre private resources of a community whose country has few urban spaces of beauty to offer. This is a country where the middle-class pays a premium not for the quality of things, but to ensure other Indians are not allowed entry.

The housing society’s notice reflects an effort to restrict the visibility of the poor in posh colonies. Not only is the effort doomed to fail, it creates a new class of aesthetic degradation—like notices and noticeboards that ask “servants and dogs” not to take the lift. Class is ugly everywhere, but unlike in the West, we in India have not figured out how to hide this ugliness.

Even as India’s affluent worry about the increasing visibility of support staff, they cannot survive without them.

I remember the first time I walked on Malabar Hill in Bombay, in the mid-90s. It was funny because I had heard for many years that this was the most expensive residential area in India, but the only people I saw on the streets were mostly poor men. Drivers and other kinds of attendants. This was still a time when an Anglicized elite lived on Malabar Hill, who discussed French cinema and stuff like that. Today, the gentry has left, priced out by richer people, and the human representation of its streets is even more impoverished.

In the Gurgaon colony where I live, this is how the morning breaks as I go for a run. A whole slum troops in. First, scores of security guards, almost all of them migrants from poor north Indian states. Then dozens of dog-walkers arrive, almost all male and chiefly Bengali speaking. Most of them seem to despise dogs. They often drag the animals, talking to other dog-walker friends, or in the trance of their phones, or flirting with rare female dog-walkers, usually from the North East. Then, part-time maids come on their cycles, to be harassed by the guards who flirt by making life difficult for them. Drivers come in next, a group that appears the most self-assured for some mysterious reason. Most have very little work, and they linger about playing cards with other drivers, or stand on roads and peer into homes. Meanwhile, the colony invests in watering parks and creating flower beds and other such things in a futile attempt to elevate the aesthetics of the place.

When I return from my run, I find a poor person squatting on the floor, mopping it. It resembles an exercise some people attempt in the park. To save myself from this sight, I have offered a “long-handle” mop. I used to offer it to every new maid, until I gave up because they prefer the old way. In the kitchen, another poor person is doing something, or on the phone. I go about muttering that the only thing that happens in this house is cleaning or cooking. I feel I am living with two poor cousins. One consolation is that we don’t have a permanent driver. Or that would be the third poor person whose life is filled with dying brothers and children, or debt, and other real or made-up tragedies.

A strange nature of India’s affluent is that even as they worry about their support staff bringing down the aesthetics of their habitats, they do not do much to help them look any better. So we often see in malls and airports the Indian family trailed by a melancholic maid in shabby clothes. It would not cost much to groom them, but somehow we do not do that.

The typical Indian house-help looks far more impoverished than, say, the Filipina maid who is a familiar sight in places like Dubai and Singapore. Recently, I came to know of a non-resident Indian couple who landed in Delhi with their Filipina maid. The whole extended family was abuzz with descriptions of the “very sexy” maid, who “looked” more affluent than the people she was serving. It appears that India’s support staff are chosen by a process of Darwinian selection to ensure they do not threaten their masters, who then worry about the egalitariamaiden property of light.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





A contest of two faulty arguments familiar to Indians


2023-07-02

The US Supreme Court has deemed it illegal for universities to practise “affirmative action”, which is an American phrase for what Indians call “reservations”. This is a part of the court’s war against discrimination based on “race”, which is an American word for “caste”, and to assert the US Constitution’s “colorblindness,” which is American idealistic nonsense whose Indian equivalent is “secularism.” The verdict was split with a majority of judges in favour of abolition and three dissents, marking not the end of a war, but a historic moment in an eternal political contest of two bad arguments.

The argument that triumphed is hinged on the view that ‘everyone is equal’ in theory. The dissenting argument is based on the idea that society should lower the bar for some people to help them catch up. One argument is dear to people who venerate ‘merit’ because they misunderstand their own luck for talent. Among the people who celebrated the verdict was Donald Trump, who was born into wealth. He wrote, “People with extraordinary ability and everything else necessary for success, including future greatness for our Country, are finally being rewarded…” This is almost exactly how many ‘upper castes’ in India would react if the top court deems all quotas in educational institutions illegal. There is an implication in this view that their success is a result of their innate abilities. They think ‘merit’ begins at the start of an entrance exam, and not in the cradle or earlier. What they cannot see is that being born into the upper class is a system with a 100% reservation for its own. Just look what happened in some spheres of life when a broad section of Indians got some opportunities. There was a time when it seemed only upper castes could crack the Joint Entrance Exam of the Indian Institutes of Technology, or even have the right technique to be batsmen. All that has changed.

The other argument, the one that lost, is more humane and like all humane arguments about equality it is dear to people who are beneficiaries of inequality. It is also dear to people of a race or caste or group that is perceived as the “underclass”. Especially the elite among them, who are in the best position to gain from affirmative action. They appropriate the trauma of their people, even though they themselves are privileged. When a society lowers the bar to help victims of historical injustice, the people who benefit the most from are not weakest in the group, but the best off.

I do not say that African-Americans who benefited from affirmative action were all affluent, but I do say that they were, in their own ways luckier than most of their community. Even to work hard and succeed, you need to come from the right home. There are African-Americans who got college admission “on merit” as Indians would call it. They endure the discomfort of being perceived as unfairly selected. This is among the arguments that conservatives have presented to abolish affirmative action. It is not that their hearts ache for “meritorious” African-Americans, but because arguments need moral facades.

Michelle Obama issued a statement on the verdict that tried to remind us she entered Princeton and Harvard not because of quotas, but because she had “worked hard” for it; “…I sometimes wondered if people thought I got there because of affirmative action. It was a shadow that students like me couldn’t shake, whether those doubts came from the outside or inside our own minds.” She considers affirmative action essential, though, despite some of its problems. Her husband Barack Obama reacted similarly: “Affirmative action was never a complete answer in the drive towards a more just society. But for generations of students who had been systematically excluded from most of America’s key institutions—it gave us the chance to show we more than deserved a seat at the table.”

The problem with affirmative action is that it has not realized its goals; it has not liberated most African-Americans. So why have a policy that gives to privileged African-Americans what it takes from privileged Caucasians?

If both the arguments on affirmative action are flawed, then what is the solution to the fact that some people having an unfair head-start over the rest?

Much strife in the modern world emerges from constricted paths to economic well-being. What you love doing or what you’re very good at is usually not lucrative. Most entrepreneurs, artists and athletes fail to make a good living. A more certain path to a decent life is corporate bureaucracy, whose doors are guarded by a club that demands “quality education” for entry. So the consecration of higher education is not only a fake solution to social problems, but also a creator of new forms of inequality. It is a club that wishes to broaden the diversity of its snobs by luring people to imitate straight Caucasian males.

There will always be inequality because that is the instinctive objective of individual ambition. The central aim of a typical family is to provide an unfair advantage to the family’s children. Economic inequality is far less unnatural than people think. Social equality, which means the rich pretending everyone is equal, is possible because mass acting is not hard to achieve.

An ideal society would not waste its time trying to end inequality. Instead, it would try to establish a compassionate government that makes a high quality of life inexpensive for everyone, with only things like a seat in a carbon-fibre submarine that are left unaffordable.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





Why diversity can’t be used in defence of obsolete ways


2023-07-09

Is there only one way to be good? This is the question of the season, as politicians preparing for general elections next year measure the interest of Hindu society in reforming other people, a process that is not without a bit of torment.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi has expressed a desire to end or dilute personal laws that let religious traditions govern important aspects of domestic life, like the exclusivity of marriage, divorce and inheritance, generally favouring men. Over the decades, Hindu reformation has ensured that most Hindus enjoy or endure modern laws that deem men and women equal. They have agreed to consider caste discrimination illegal, unless it is used to favour ‘lower castes’, and Hindu men have conceded vast ground to Hindu women. But Indians of other faiths, especially Muslims, have markedly different rules for marriage, divorce and inheritance. A Muslim man can take four wives, negotiate a favourable alimony, divorce easily and expect to inherit a disproportionate share of property. This has for long annoyed Hindu men. Muslim women would have never guessed so many Hindus wish them well. Bringing Muslims into the fold of the Uniform Civil Code (UCC) has for long been the political desire of an unknowable proportion of Hindus. But it involves the inconvenience of forcing hundreds of tribes to abide by the same, which has little emotional resonance among the majority but is needed for the spectacle of national reformation.

Opposition to a UCC has two faces—one that is emotional and the other that is esoteric. The primary defence of the clergy and other conservatives who benefit from existing personal laws is that the influence of religion in their domestic life is the core of their religious identity and that in any case they have done a bit of internal reform. Also, some tribes, whose ways of life are protected by the Constitution, have threatened revolt if these are subsumed by a reformation. For instance, among Khasi people, family inheritance goes to the youngest daughter. How can modernity better this; so why change? The Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, the primary pressure group of Hindus, too has in the recent past objected to proposals that alter some ways of life, like the government’s bid to raise the minimum age for women to marry to 21 from 18. Should modernity interfere so much with society, it wondered.

The more esoteric argument against a UCC comes from people who are not religious or traditional, but who lament the loss of something called diversity. An odd thing about worshippers of diversity is that they are usually a monoculture themselves. That is the point they miss.

It is in the nature of public morality and reformation to insist that it is common to all, that there is only one way to be right, to be just. What is diversity, then? Just a fancy dress parade of costumes and cute marriage functions and weird food? I think it is a bit more than that.

Language, climate and culture do influence how people think, and how people think matters. People who do not have eight words for shame think differently from people who speak in more vivid languages, and hot-climate philosophers are different from cold-climate philosophers, a matter for another day. So diversity is not trivial. But when it comes to the reformation of a society, that process where some things that were created to favour some people in another time are altered for fairness, there is not much scope for diversity. Across the world and across ages, human beings have demonstrated that there are diverse ways of being unfair and only one way of being fair. This is why morality is a form of clarity. So, by its basic nature, a reformation has to be ‘uniform’. The argument that diversity must be preserved because it is ancient heritage, and preservation is a good thing, is farcical.

People are and will be inescapably diverse—in appearance, in speech and in what they like to eat and how they think—but what modern India is trying to say through its UCC campaign is that in some important matters of domestic life, everyone will have to leave the antiquity that created their traditions and step into modernity, which is the name of a time that has won a cultural war.

Actually, all personal laws were, at one time, the uniform code of the victorious who replaced diverse tribal customs with mainstream religious edicts. The first imposition of Sharia law, for instance, was done by a Muslim elite which abolished the cultural practices of tribes that had adopted Islam. Hinduism and Christianity did the same.

Critics of Modi’s Bharatiya Janata Party point out that the problem with a UCC is that the party’s intention is not noble. Amartya Sen said a few days ago, “…There is definitely some connection between the urgency to implement the UCC and paving the way for the far-fetched idea of Hindu Rashtra.”

But then, that is how society reforms. It is naïve to believe that societies become better because people want to suddenly become better, or slowly for that matter. A society changes because parents love their children, children don’t want to be their parents, and one community has a grouse against another and wishes to torment it on moral grounds. Modern democracy itself originated partly in the disenchantment of Britain’s second rung of society, people who sought to control the monarchy by forcing it to accept a set of moral undertakings.

After love, it is grouse that makes the world a better place.





Why a digital currency for animals could find takers


2023-07-16

What if animals had their own money, and they could pay us to serve them? You may assume at first glance that this is just another way of saying, “world wildlife fund.” But what if there is no human proxy involved? What if a wild elephant had his own digital money, irreversibly assigned to him, from which he pays humans to eliminate poachers or make reparations for running amok in a village? Also, what if he is able to replenish his bank account by being a star, or an extra, in an immersive virtual reality game? What if the digital currency is backed by real money and the most cash-rich human virtue, our obligation to nature, and hence has intrinsic value for humans?

What surprised me more than the concept of “interspecies money” is the fact that the Indian government has agreed to listen to the Scotsman who has proposed it. I try to imagine his initial probing emails to the outer edges of Indian bureaucracy: “‘Interspecies Money’ would be a new currency that will be held by animals…” Yet, I gather that he will be heard at substantive levels of the Indian government later this month.

I wish to describe Jonathan Ledgard without using ambiguous labels like ‘thinker’ and ‘futurist’, which are words used for him by organizations like the World Economic Forum and the Pulitzer Centre. Ledgard is a creator, prophet and fund-raiser of ideas that use technology to solve some aspects of poverty. He is also a novelist, and a former foreign correspondent of The Economist.

‘Interspecies Money’ tries to solve the poverty of animals. As most of nature and its animals are in poor regions of the world, the new currency hopes to solve the poverty of many humans, too. Here is one way it could work: The central banks of some nations come together to form, as Ledgard puts it, “the bank of other species.” It will be funded by a portion of public funds that are meant for wildlife, conservation and battling climate change. The bank may also be funded by private philanthropy. This means “the bank of other species” would start with billions of dollars. The money would be converted into a global digital currency. At first, only some species would be chosen and given their own digital clones. These clones will be given their own bank accounts, into which ‘Interspecies Money’ will be transferred. The digital avatars of those animals will effectively own that money. Some will hold just a few cents; the more rare and exotic species “may hold sums equivalent to a rare Rolex watch.” Even within such an idealistic idea, equality is just not possible. An ant, perhaps, will be poorer than a zebra.

The assignment of value will not be done by whim. ‘Interspecies Money’ emerges from a conviction that the value of nature is financially quantifiable. How much is a river worth in dollars? What is the worth of a rhino? Studies exist that have attempted to assign values to many elements of nature that we just presume are free and have no material value.

These studies appeal to Ledgard because animal valuations are made in the context of how critical they are to our well-being, and not only as oils, garments, food and bones. So, “African forest elephants may give US$1.75 million value per animal against US$40,000 value for their tusks. Large whales may be worth US$2 million per animal because of their ability to draw down carbon. Similarly, trees and soil biomes are being quantified in terms of the services they provide.”

For ‘Interspecies Money’ to work, the welfare of animals has to be defined in ways that can been measured by hardware like cameras and sensors. Human settlements in their proximity will then have an opportunity to achieve those goals, and once a set of technologies agree that the humans have indeed done their tasks, like say removed dangerous impediments or increased the population of a species, the animals would automatically transfer money to these humans. As the emotional appeal of the currency grows among humans, its intrinsic value would increase.

Animals would be able to replenish their accounts by actually earning money. Apart from featuring in films and games for a fee, they may sell data of their real-time movements and immediate environment.

The intent of ‘Interspecies Money’ is to finance conservation, and its genius is in finding a way to convert service into a lure for people who live in the proximity of wildlife, usually the very poor.

As a digital currency, ‘Interspecies Money’ has a higher potential to grow in value than famed cryptocurrencies. Cryptos thrived because governments were late to see them as a threat to their oppressive power. Converting a hyper-moral freedom into its opposite is called regulation, and governments are working towards doing that to cryptos. They will succeed. The moment a crypto is subject of regulation, it ceases to be a crypto; it is just a private digital currency, and such an entity loses its edginess and its very reason to exist.

‘Interspecies Money’ would have the odd character of having the blessings of governments and at once being cool because it is underpinned by the mother of all cool virtues—conservation.

As Ledgard tries to sell the idea to India, I am certain one of the main concerns of officials would be that Indians would try to game the system somehow and steal from animals. Also, I am certain, there would be some discussions over how much money to assign a cow.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





The list of stuff only the super rich can buy has shrunk


2023-07-23

In a few days, Virgin Galactic expects to launch three customers into “outer space” and bring them back, too. The company says it has sold seats to about 800 people, with ticket prices ranging from $250,000 to $400,000 for the experience of flying about 80km above earth, an act that qualifies as leaving earth. The launch comes just weeks after a commercial submersible imploded, killing five people, some of whom had paid about $250,000 per seat. These prices are low compared to the $55 million three rich men paid to stay on the International Space Stage for a few days. It appears that some of experiences only the super-rich can afford are also highly risky and, intuitively, far from enjoyable. You can argue that enjoyment is not all there is to a paid experience, or, as every family knows, a vacation. Still, the fact that billionaires must shoot themselves to space or sink to ocean depths to see and feel something the rest of us haven’t, points to an oddly satisfying state of the world: There are no real products for the super-rich.

Overpriced bags, isolated giant-silo homes and 100m-long yachts, too, might be just outlandish expressions of the fact that even though money can buy happiness, there is no kind of happiness in the market that only a lot of money buys. Most luxuries that are enjoyable and safe are affordable to mere millionaires or even the upper middle-class. The super-rich are left with ridiculous things. Like cars with crystals, handbags you cannot choose but which choose you, fish that can poison you, secluded mansions that defy the human instinct for community, and weddings that might cost more than Bollywood films. That the world’s best phone is not exclusive to millionaires suggests that beyond a point, products are only expensive; they do not improve your quality of life.

People who try to sell something to extravagant billionaires have to believe in a fallacy, for their own relevance. That things are always related in direct proportion, that more money seeks greater exclusivity.

Economic democratization of the world has ensured that the modern poor have comforts that medieval emperors did not enjoy. It has also ensured that the super-rich of another time enjoyed a degree of exclusivity that is not available to modern billionaires. For instance, when commercial air travel began, only the rich flew. The experience of flying was not only immensely useful, it was also exclusive to the rich. In 1929, in the US, a coast-to-coast return air ticket cost half the annual per-capita of the nation. As recently as 1996, according to the encyclopaedia site Britannica, a one-way London-to-Washington ticket on the Concorde, which flew faster than the speed of sound, or the Earth’s spin for that matter, cost about ₹10 lakh in today’s money. Today, for half that amount, you can get a first-class return ticket on a Mumbai-New York flight.

Billionaires who undertake outlandish space and marine missions are pioneers who pave the way for the same adventures to become mass market. Some early aviators were rich people who contributed to the evolution of commercial aviation, sacrificing their lives at times in the process. I do not dispute the value of such pioneers, even if they are paid customers. But I suspect it is not their intention to put their lives on the line so that one day I will get to go to space or the ocean floor at reasonable cost. And that makes the lemons that are sold to them even more ridiculous.

There is one fascinating product, though, that is sold to the super-rich. The perception that they are politicians. Once, the rich were financiers of politicians and often remained in the shadows. This financing was primarily a business expense. But, today, many wealthy people are politicians themselves who have bought their way into positions of social influence. America has had a very famous example. Back home, we have legislators with declared assets worth hundreds of crores, with ₹1,413 crore the top score among members of legislative assemblies. Some politicians may privately laugh at the modesty of these declarations; their big triumph is that they have bought the social masquerade of activism without being identified publicly as rich people.

There is another useful luxury product for the super-rich, but one the modern superrich haven’t quite grasped—artistic acclaim.

Since my teens, I have had a nagging doubt when I read some Western literary classics. What if all this, all of literature was just the expression of the rich from a time when only the rich could do some things? Am I just reading the naive mediocre observations of the affluent? What if most of all vaunted Western literature is merely the outpouring of a highly networked club? Many acclaimed European writers were indeed rich, or were promoted by the rich.

With the economic democratization of a whole new class of luxury products, including doctorates and literary efforts, apart from philosophical and artistic pursuits, it is easy to forget their social origins. Even today, many writers and artists from wealthy homes buy fame through their social equity. It is a fair generalization that science and sports too emerged from elite society, but as they are objective fields, the mediocre rich could not compete once they became widely accessible. But the arts are a different matter. Yet, this is an arena that the modern super-rich have abandoned, as most of them seem to have moved away from intellectual pursuits. But then, the rich who manage to pass themselves off as writers and ‘thinkers’ probably know the joys of abstract fame.





‘Barbie’ highlights for men who don’t want to watch it


2023-07-30

I am an expert in men and I wish to explain the Barbie movie to men who do not wish to watch it but would like to talk about it. When I went to watch Barbie, wearing grey, I expected to be the only man in the theatre. I was, because I am usually right. But there were three adolescent boys, too, who stained an otherwise fine prediction. They were with their girlfriends, who may have dragged them along. I do not recall a film that is so widely perceived by men as something that is meant only for women. Even straight men who have enjoyed Bridgerton and Downtown Abbey have stayed away from Barbie. I had faith in it because it is directed by Greta Gerwig, who made Lady Bird.

First, it is important to note that Barbie is a doll that girls like, one that adult women today used to adore when they were girls, with some exceptions who always let you know they never liked Barbie; it’s like how people who went to Harvard find a way to let you know the fact. The first Barbie doll was a theoretically perfect blonde beauty who irritated some women. The complaint was that Barbie “set impossible beauty standards for girls,” which means Barbie made girls want to be like her who then felt bad because they couldn’t. This is humanities nonsense and one of the great absurd misreadings of how humans think, but it succeeded anyhow. Stereotypical Barbie became so despised that Mattel Inc was forced to come up with diverse Barbies, including an African-American Barbie, over-weight Barbie and even a pregnant Barbie. And the modern Barbies were all “career women.”

At this point, you may want to know what the synopsis of the film is, even though there are few things as meaningless as the synopsis of a film. Here it is, in any case: Barbie is about an unhappy doll who does not know what she wants, and who also does not love her boyfriend. So maybe it’s a kind of realistic drama.

The film begins with a spoof that might be, in an odd irony, recognizable to more men than women. Because it is a riff on an iconic scene from Stanley Kubrick’s 2001: A Space Odyssey—the scene in which early apes are infected by a mysterious black slab, turning them violent. To the same legendary music, Greta Gerwig replaces the slab with Stereotypical Barbie, and the apes with little ancient girls playing with their baby-dolls. Barbie infects them and the girls turn violent, dismembering their old dolls. It is particularly funny if you have seen A Space Odyssey. If you don’t count people who work in cinema, my guess is that more men than women are part of the Space Odyssey cult, just as I am certain but cannot prove more women than men have watched Gone With the Wind.

For most of its run, Barbie is a comedy that roasts women, Mattel and wokes who have infected the world with the inane language of political correctness. It roasts men, of course, but in a surprisingly gentler way than you may be led to believe. Even the portrayal of Ken, who is a beautiful airhead madly in love with Barbie, who is nothing without Barbie, who craves attention from Barbie, is a satire on women because Ken is a riff on the needy pretty girlfriend who has no other pursuits in life except love.

At the heart of the comedy, though, there is a primordial wound. It is that the world is run by men, and these men favour men. This may irritate you. Look, you may want to say, you did boring things like prepare for objective-type tests, suffer engineering and suffer dull jobs, while most girls enjoyed “literature” and “fine arts” and “film criticism” and “hypnosis” and something called “gender studies”; how can they then accuse you of pushing them into low-paying jobs?

But then you may have similar complaints against Caucasian males, who can say that they have better things to do than suppressing you but here you are discreetly carping that they always get better jobs. The beauty of a class struggle is that all classes have a right to whine. Even male billionaires, whom no human can oppress, endure a class struggle—against sentient machines. Who do you think is funding all the nonsense about machines taking over the world?

There is an argument Barbie makes that is hard to refute, but the film does not have the courage to sheath it in the correct language. The film glorifies success, but it also acknowledges that women may just seek an ordinary life. A character suggests to Mattel’s CEO that the company should come up with an ordinary Barbie who wants to be nothing much beyond a mom. This is the right to mediocrity, a right that men enjoy in ways that may not be easily discernible. They appear to have a career, one at which they are not very good, but they are still able to survive for long years. Exceptional women can find the recognition that exceptional men get because it is hard to suppress genius. It is ordinary women who never get the deals that ordinary men enjoy.

So Barbie does make men the problem and make fun of you, your brotherhood, the way you explain things to women (though I know you explain it that way to men too), and your jealousies. In a scene, the Barbies fake their devotion to the guitar recitals of their Kens. The film insinuates that women feign appreciation for men. In the real world, it is probably untrue, and it could be one of the underrated reasons why the world is skewed against women. Women appreciate the works of men, they are generous to exceptional men, but men, in general, do not engage much with the works of exceptional women. It is this deficit in generosity that partly finances the progress of men.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





The character of Gurgaon is drawn from its rural roots


2023-08-06

Six feet above the ground, when no Indian is in the frame, parts of Gurgaon look first world. There are these modern buildings made of glass and steel. Gurgaon has the reputation of being affluent. Some of its finest hotels are also called hospitals. There are apartments that cost ₹30 crore; those buildings have their own spas. As a result, many people were surprised, or maybe amazed, when mobs in Gurgaon burnt a mosque and several vehicles. They saw this as a contradiction—that shiny real estate for global companies and home to some of the highest paid Indians could also host religious riots. But then, in real life, contradictions do not exist. That is the very nature of contradictions—they cannot exist. Many things that people consider contradictions are not: Sari-clad women who work as space scientists, urchins gawking at a restaurant or riots in the shadow of a mall are not contradictions. Their co-existence is natural. Gurgaon is perfectly suitable for violence.

The true character of a new town is never in the ‘new’ part; it is in the nature of its original population. They are the base.

I live in Gurgaon, which is less than 50km from Nuh, Ground Zero for the spate of violence that spilled into Gurgaon. Schools shut and people did not venture out. Household helps who do not wear sindoor have fled, and those wearing vermillion have been filling in. A high proportion of helps, delivery boys, air-conditioner mechanics and drivers are Muslim migrants. Many of them have fled to Bihar, and it occurred to me that I now live in a place that some people would flee for Bihar. How did I get here?

Actual Gurgaon, which is mistakenly known as Old Gurgaon, emerges from a pastoral way of life and is even today rustic, and mindful of caste and religion. It has a history of communal tension, and is also one of the worst regions in India for women. Its mother ship, Haryana has a gender ratio of 879 females to every 1,000 males. (The national average is 940, and Kerala’s is 1,084.)

Gurgaon of the old is all around, even in the heart of its ‘new town’, not as adorable ruins but as omens. Dozens of free-range cows stand in the middle of the road, sensing a new mysterious privilege. The municipality is one of the worst managed in my experience. It is as though people who have been entrusted to bring the city to villages believe that they must bring villages to the city. Except for a stretch called Golf Course Road, and a national highway, every other road is in laughable shape. All this points to a political assurance that the votes come for reasons other than civic standards, and those reasons are economic and communal.

Gurgaon and the villages around it are strongholds of men who claim to worship cows, some of whom assault unlucky Muslims who get caught with them. Events in Nuh itself were partly caused by a cow vigilante called Monu Manesar, who is on the run from police for the alleged murder of two Muslims. He declared that he would attend an event at a temple in Muslim-majority Nuh. According to several reporters, a procession of Hindus led by a Hindu outfit was attacked by local Muslims. At the time of writing, Manesar remains a free man.

In 2007, when Gurgaon was under rapid transformation and builders had bought vast patches of farmland to develop, I met several farmers who had suddenly become wealthy by selling land. They used to grow millets and mustard making ₹15,000 an acre. But they saw a 500-fold increase in land prices over a decade. In the delirium of sudden affluence, farmers were buying cars on full down payment. They complained that women who used to wake up at four in the morning to finish household work had discovered bed tea. They even called it “bed tea”. When two neighbours now crossed each other, they had a silent duel over who would say “Ram Ram” first. “The man who is poorer should greet first,” a farmer said of the new etiquette. They also discovered diabetes and heart disease.

Around that time, a woman who lived in an upscale area recalled that one morning a visitor appeared at her doorstep. “I thought she wanted a job as a maid, but then I realized she was looking for a house to buy.” The sudden wealth left many villagers desperate for measures to manage it. There was the story, which I hope is not apocryphal because it’s so interesting, of five men who walked into a school and asked the teachers if there was a smart girl of marriageable age among their students. The men said their family had earned three crore from a land sale but they were all illiterate. They had decided one of the brothers should marry an educated girl who would know how to handle the money.

Old Gurgaon’s landed grew rich, but they had also become a social underclass because of executive migrants who gave Gurgaon its reputation for ‘cosmopolitanism’, a word with no meaning. About a decade ago, the local men dealt with social confusion by routinely beating up sahibs after street altercations. Now, the sahibs have become wiser.

Gurgaon continues to boom. The rent of my home has doubled in the last two years. But the fundamental nature of the place is the nature of its original people, the people of rural Haryana. Even Mumbai could not pretend for long that it was anything more than a large Maharashtrian town.

One of the great civil wars of our times is the battle between the idea of the village and the idea of a city; the battle between roots and rootlessness. It is a battle that the village is winning everywhere.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





What happens when we’re exposed to stunning videos


2023-08-13

An extraordinary video clip was at the heart of the nominal no-confidence motion against the government of Narendra Modi. The clip shows two women being paraded naked in Manipur as part of a sexual assault against them. For many weeks before it went viral online, most of India was unmoved by the communal violence in Manipur. Not because Indians don’t have a heart, but because our threshold for public compassion is high. But the video did shock Indians. People had heard that such things were done to women as a form of communal revenge, but now they could see it. For decades, how to ‘integrate’ the north-east had been talked about; the video clip from one of its states was a sign that what unites India is all that is wrong with us.

The video, which appears to have been suppressed by the Manipur government for weeks, may well have ended the violence in the state. The humanitarian impact of mobile phones is immense. People react to an extraordinary video of an atrocity as though what separated them from compassion was hard evidence. But a clip is not just visible evidence of an event, it contains the full force of drama.

There will come a time when people stop reacting even to extraordinary videos. Already, our lives are filled with videos from real life that stun and shock us, but only for a few minutes. In fact, people have stopped reacting to extraordinariness; they are only reacting to the newness of the genre.

As I set out to write, I watched a clip from Chennai of a cow attacking a nine-year-old girl, who screams in fright. Her mother watches in horror as the cow repeatedly flings the girl on its horns, trying to gore her. There are many videos from Indian street life that show the sacred animal attacking pedestrians. Also of stray dogs mauling people, including children. In April, a 65-year-old man who was strolling on the campus of Aligarh Muslim University was mauled by a pack of dogs; he died of wounds. The entire episode is on video.

In a sane nation, these gruesome videos would have exposed the municipal incompetence that hides behind politics and the nonsense about India’s civilizational love for animals. The clips also belie the claim of people who are barricaded from feral India that dogs and cows pose no risk to humans unless the animals are provoked. Nothing substantive has come of the videos. It is probably too late for a video of a cow goring people or a dog biting off bits of a child to force the country to fix our streets. This portents a world that will be accustomed to extraordinary videos; where a clip would retain its power to shock, but will not set in motion any process to prevent what is shocking.

Most extraordinary videos are not political. I will list out, without any deep attempt to recollect, what comes to my mind when I think of ‘extraordinary clips’: Two Chinese women having an argument in a car; one of them stepping out and a tiger carrying her off by her neck; a tyre coming off a distant passing truck that rolls across the road, bounces over medians, and hits a passing pedestrian on his head who then lies motionless; a video grab of a camera inside a bus moments before and during a crash that killed most occupants or perhaps all. The timbre of these events differs from what we considered extraordinary not very long ago: Taliban executing people by shooting, beheading or throwing them off buildings.

The extraordinary has become vast, multifarious and common, without becoming ordinary. Even 25 years ago, we were so naive that the parachutes of two sky divers getting entwined would be global news. It was in such an era that two aircraft crashed into the Twin Towers. The world was stunned for days. People suffered trauma from just watching it on TV. A few years later, in 2006, Saddam Hussain of Iraq was hanged and his execution caught on camera. Few people may have seen the clip because mainstream news channels did not show it. Somehow, clips didn’t go viral back then. The media, ironically, used to protect people from extraordinary images.

Often, the most surprising thing in a viral clip is human behaviour. For instance, the final moments of Hussain showed him as a man with more courage than what we were told about despots. He looked dignified. As he spoke to his executioners, he looked like someone giving directions to his palace. He refused their offer of a hood. He was in the middle of his final prayer when the plank under his feet gave way. The speed of a human fall, that too was surprising.

At the time, most of the world had never seen a real hanging, or a person dying. Now, almost everyone has. Many people have even watched streamed suicides. What happens to a society when it cannot be shocked or even surprised anymore by a visual; only mildly entertained? It would be a familiar world; a world just before the mobile-camera, where writers struggled to captivate people about things that did not directly concern them.

When I was little, I thought people who said they believed in God were liars because if they truly believed in such a supernatural force, they would be in a perpetual trance because what can be more captivating than God? I now realize the error in my thinking. People get used to the extraordinary without ever denying its extraordinary nature. If an alien appears tomorrow, people will be stunned, of course, but only for a few weeks. The fifth alien appearance might not even go viral, unless it has anything new to show.





Why the right to privacy holds negligible mass appeal


2023-08-20

Even 25 years ago, almost nothing was considered private by most people, barring nudity and acts that required it. Even today, there are tribes that do not consider nudity a private affair, or anything else for that matter. But over the years, the sort of Indians who know what asparagus is, who also invariably know what privacy is, have become acutely concerned about guarding their personal information, chiefly from the government. They are aghast at the Digital Personal Data Protection Act which came to life a few days ago. The Act appears to protect a citizen’s data from private players, but gives government officials access to it, if they can establish a reasonable cause to snoop.

The government already has access to much of our data. The new law allows it to easily interlink various strands of a life, give flimsy reasons to snoop, and indemnify officials who gain access. The law has alarmed some people. This is the end of privacy, they say. To most Indians, however, privacy does not appear to be an issue. Privacy, as a right, does not stir the emotions of regular people. Most of them are probably more agitated by the religious rights of others than conceding private space to the government.

Sophisticated rights have little emotional appeal. Is it because these are culturally alien to India? Or, is it because they need better marketing? Perhaps, but the primary reason why some modern rights are not popular is that they are not natural.

There are two types of rights. Rights from antiquity, and esoteric rights. The former are fundamental ways of being that preceded even the idea of rights. People tend to be serious about these—like the right to live, earn a living, follow a faith, and have a home. These rights have origins in human instinct. Esoteric rights are inventions. Privacy was invented; then marketed. The two types of rights do not come from the same place.

The origin of the right to privacy is not as noble as its effect. It is funny how the news media is among the biggest champions of privacy, because the privacy movement began in a campaign of the American aristocracy to gag the free press. In 1890, lawyers Samuel Warren and Louis Brandeis published an article in the Harvard Law Review called ‘The Right to Privacy.’ It was triggered by a spate of gossip columns about the US urban elite. They complained, “The press is overstepping in every direction the obvious bounds of propriety and of decency… To occupy the indolent, column upon column is filled with idle gossip, which can only be procured by intrusion upon the domestic circle.” According to opinion-makers in America, in this essay lies the origin of the privacy movement.

In time, as privacy sought to recruit moral reasons, it couched itself as an individual right against any intrusion. In the digital era, it caught the imagination of a global mono-culture that sought to deny any sort of personal data, even anonymized, to corporations and governments. This movement was driven by a braiding of reasonable fear, psychotic paranoia and megalomania. It was imported to India to fight Facebook and Aadhaar.

Activists assailed Aadhaar as state coercion to collect biometrics. These were the same people who, for a mere tourist visa, gave everything the US embassy asked. To this accusation, their defence was “consent”. They claimed they consented to give their information to the US, and not to the Indian government, which coerced them by making banking difficult without Aadhaar. This is a spurious argument. The fact is they were coerced by the US government, too. A visa applicant’s biometrics and considerable personal information are a mandatory requirement.

Like liberty, privacy is not a feral freedom, but a negotiated privilege granted by the state. This is only in practice; in theory, privacy is very lofty.

In 2017, India’s Supreme Court ruled that privacy is a “fundamental right”. The term ‘fundamental’ has the sense of a basic instinct; yet privacy is not that at all. In practical terms, a fundamental right is deemed so basic by the Constitution that it is protected even from government action. Privacy is not mentioned in that document because it was written in an era when its status was not so elevated. The Supreme Court has elevated privacy by extrapolating some of the original fundamental rights (and clubbing together ideas of home, ownership and digital identity). But then, can a right that is so new also be ‘fundamental’? I don’t think so.

It makes me wonder if anyone can ever win against the government. We appear to enjoy fancy rights, but there are caveats and caveats. Nothing trumps national interest, and the government holds all the cards to define what is in the national interest. There is something ancient about this, about the inequality of the ruler and the subject. In that way, this injustice seems more natural than esoteric plans to reform it.

The government does understand privacy very well. See how it guards official secrets. Secrecy is state’s right to privacy.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





How to survive if you don’t feel proud of our Moon feat


2023-08-27

I do not feel any pride in India’s Moon landing. It did bring me low-grade joy, like an Indian victory in Test cricket against Bangladesh. But pride is a giant emotion. I wonder what made the others proud? Did they imagine that they share the same genes as the scientists who planned the mission? Or did they elect excellent space-faring politicians? Or maybe they are beautiful hive-minds, who not only feel pride, but also shame when India does shameful things? Or maybe they donated money to the space programme? Or, maybe they sacrificed their well-being by asking their children to pick space science and seek government jobs instead of pursuing computer science and emigrating. Why were they proud? What is this thing called pride? Maybe their localities have excellent roads that do not resemble the lunar surface, and the same government that sent metal to the Moon has also figured out how to keep traffic signals working and runs excellent hospitals, or has cleaned the air of cancerous particles? Maybe the joy in pride is not thinking so much about it; maybe thinking is the enemy of feeling. You cannot feel anything if you also want clarity.

What India’s Moon landing tells me though is that if India can do it, many nations can. And if they don’t because it is too expensive, then it means they pay their people high wages, while India underpays its scientists and just about anybody down the chain. There is an entertaining piece of data that says that every Moon mission of India has been cheaper than a typical Hollywood big-budget film set in outer space. But I do not believe these missions are as cheap as India officially claims. I suspect they are subsidized in ways that are not apparent on paper. In any case, as an amiable Indian rocket scientist himself told me once, rocket science is an easy form of science; not trivial, but still easier than solving malaria or other major scientific efforts. Rocket science, oddly, is no rocket science.

This is not how most Indians feel, but then I am not alone either. How must people who have not found a reason to be proud of India live in the shadow of all this chest-thumping? How must we survive our times when we do not feel how most of the nation feels about things? Maybe we lie low, and confide only in those who are closest to us? But there is loneliness in that, in not being a part of national feelings.

The origins of space-faring are in national pride. It was heavily subsidized by nationalism in both the US and Russia. But then, at the time, those two nations were truly doing what no one else could. Later, the passion of the masses died down. The US, especially, cut budgets for several programmes. More complex forms of science rose and they became the focus, which eventually contributed to space science. But space continues to hold appeal in India, and that points to a scarcity of reasons for pride.

There is one mainstream criticism of India’s space mission—how can a nation where children die of curable diseases and every big city is unliveable waste resources on space missions? But this is not a robust argument. Should a nation solve only one problem at a time, and keep somewhat esoteric ideas in abeyance until the more difficult ones are sorted? That does not make sense. India is right in pursuing space, but it is wrong about one of its important justifications for its Moon and Mars missions—that the missions have branded India as scientifically advanced. There is a popular view that with the recent Moon landing, India has entered a “prestigious club” of four nations. But that is not how prestige works. Instead, the entry of India reduces the prestige of Moon landings itself. We see the principle at work in the prestige of academic institutions and entrance exams. The old elite lend the initial prestige, which becomes an allure that makes the lower rungs work hard to achieve it. But their entry into the prestigious fortress reduces its very prestige.

If India wants its space-faring to lend it a certain scientific heft in global perception, it needs to do a host of mundane things first, like create a more orderly nation. As of now, if anyone lands in Delhi, or worse, in Mumbai, or by even worse misfortune, Bangalore, the full civic dysfunction of the country is apparent in no time.

Also, India continues to be in the news for things that usually happen in some of the most backward regions in the world. In that light, India’s ability to land on the Moon takes away the veneer of sophistication from such missions.

But all this is irrelevant to those who are moved by national pride. Pride is a low-hanging fruit of happiness. I do not grudge them that. Many people go through their whole lives doing nothing they can be proud off, so why not usurp a bit from the nation? Maybe national pride is a natural resource, like a river or a forest. It is not without important uses.

But, somehow, people do not feel the same way about shame. People don’t look around at the corruption and mediocrity in evidence, even when they take two hours every day to travel a mere 20 kilometres in a city, and feel the shame of it all. Even though they probably have a greater role in our disgrace than what is exceptional about some of us.

Or, maybe people do feel shame. I was looking in the wrong places. I was chatting with fintech entrepreneur Kunal Shah in a totally different context, about human nature in general, and he said, “I guess pride is a side of shame.”





The future of our children who aren’t trained to suffer


2023-09-03

You may suspect that you have moved up the social rungs if you do not know anyone who has made it to the Indian Institutes of Technology this year, or to the Indian Administrative Service. Once, this hypothesis was true only if you did not know a national-grade athlete personally, or a person who can bowl faster than 130 kilometres per hour, or a politician. There are some obvious reasons why this is so, but the most influential is not that apparent.

A mainstream career is the creation of parental tyranny. Thus, a person begins preparing “for life” in teenage sorrow, in dreary generational training to go to some dreary hot small-town where there is somehow an institution of excellence. But many parents today wish to be kinder. In the urban upper middle-class and above, generally the target market for air-fryers, parents are giving children the option of choosing enjoyable paths to an uncertain future, probably leaving the next generation of air-fryers in the hands of a very different social class. Homes that can provide the best opportunities to their children to succeed in the most competitive arenas are also the homes that give them a chance to opt out of the most coveted fields. Among the beneficiaries of this act of kindness are children who excel in maths and the sciences, including boys. There are some children who adore the sciences, whose careers are then sorted, but a majority who are good in these streams find them terribly boring and wish to escape them. And their parents sponsor that. So what will they do?

Some drift towards cooler branches of science. For instance, students who in another era would have endured a decade of studying mainstream medicine are now becoming marine biologists; those who would have studied electrical engineering in another time are starting early in rocket science. But, generally I think there are going to be more arts graduates than before who will be telling us about the evils of inequality. Even if students from air-fryer homes pick conventional mainstream courses, they do not have the motivation to suffer the rigours of the first phase of their career.

Most professions are tedious and boring, especially at the start. The modern Indian student from an affluent family is not trained to endure so much suffering, or the daily humiliations of a daily job. This phenomenon was evident in the previous generations too, but then the rich were very few and in those days only the rich behaved like the rich. For instance, in my early twenties, I noticed that the posh crowd of Madras who were transferred to Bombay could not take the city’s low living standards for too long. They lasted just months; some just days. They fled, seeing no point in enduring a second-rate life in the name of a career. They chose to be in easier outposts than in the head office. This form of quitting will be more rampant in the next generation, especially in the air-fryer-home segment. They will be quitting before they give themselves a chance to become so good at what they do that they make their jobs interesting. That is the strange beauty of a career; its foundations are dreary, the training is hard and terrible, but then everything falls in place. If the young who have the potential to become fine scientists, oncologists or civil engineers choose not to realize their talents, what is to become of these fields? Their lack of ambition will benefit others from more modest backgrounds, as is the case today, but the fields would be impoverished in abstract ways. Just as there are gems in the slums whom the world never knew because they had no opportunity to shine; there are gems among the elite who had an excess of choices to escape the arduous road to greatness.

For decades, science stole artists; now the arts are stealing potential scientists. There is a view that a career is a flawed idea of the modern world, that it makes clerks out of free beings. Whatever its flaws, it is the best way in which the world pays people to get better and better at what they do. And everything beautiful that people wish to do requires years of repetition and training, most of it being drudgery they can endure only if they are forced. That is why, the way I see the lives of my peers, those who had to suffer the worst aspects of their careers because they had to send money to their families were in the long run luckier that the free who decayed in the rot of a good idle life. In any case, no working person ever escapes a career. What the freed children of today are hoping to pursue is a “an enjoyable career.” They believe this involves “doing what you love.” This is possible, but only for those who have exceptional talent. Those who are in the arts with no special talent, or have nothing new to say can be assured of a living hell. From what I have seen in the writing profession, many people confuse their love for reading with an ability to write. In reality, there cannot be two dissimilar things than reading and writing. Yet here they are, cursed with enough family stipend to pursue their delusions. If sports were a subjective field, it would be filled with sprint-lovers trying to make a career out of running 100 metres in 20 seconds, and networking every night to be voted the best.

In their pursuit of “an enjoyable career” many air-fryer children will find fake professions. If my generation is any indicator, they will find professions that involve empathy, or they will do some abstract research in a safe haven of intellectuality, or they will try to imitate their peers and create “a startup.” All these lines of work do attract exceptional talent, but, like the arts, they also help many pretend to have a vocation.





Telgi’s fate may have been different if he’d bought votes


2023-09-10

Sometime in the 1990s, word spread in Mumbai’s dance bars that a man had spent ₹80 lakh on a gorgeous dancer in a single night. The amount mentioned in the rumour had kept increasing for some hours before settling at “80 lakhs.” There was no doubt though that a man known as Abdul Karim Telgi had tipped the dancer a considerable sum. The inner circles of dance bars include cops. The news evoked the curiosity of the police, who discovered a man who had built an elaborate business counterfeiting stamp paper and other forms of revenue stationery. They had stumbled upon a perennial source of income. Telgi, who had starved as a child and sold fruits as a young man, had made a fatal error in trying to impress a dancer. But at the time, even the cops did not know how big Telgi’s operation was. Actually, no one still knows the full scope of his scam. What is certain is that he stole thousands of crores from the government.

Telgi is the subject of a SonyLiv show called Scam 2003, which is part of a series on endearing scams created by Hansal Mehta and Applause Entertainment. Telgi’s story is rare because it offers a clear glimpse into the making of a class of Indian politicians and the enormous sums of money in the underbelly of a corrupt country. The story would have never got out if he had fully evolved into a politician. He was getting there, though, to a point where an entire past of a ‘leader’ can be erased.

We like con-men, especially if they have not conned us. My favourite is the man who sold insurance to train passengers who wished to travel ticketless—if they were caught by a ticket checker, he would compensate the fine.

And there was that genius or a band of geniuses who claimed they were from the income tax department, placed newspaper classifieds to recruit interns, and raided a jewellery shop only to disappear forever. Telgi was different. He was somewhere between a con-man and a more menacing politician. He was convicted of “culpable homicide not amounting to murder,” after a man who stole from him ended up as a corpse in the Arabian Sea, which has an inconvenient high tide.

The Telgi story was broken by the journalist Sanjay Singh, whose book, Telgi: A Reporter’s Diary is the primary source material of the online series. When he first got hold of a confidential police report on the full scale of Telgi’s scam, the seasoned journalist did not divulge its details even to his boss, Rajdeep Sardesai. “If you want to keep a secret do not tell your boss about it.”

In the book, Singh writes that at its peak, Telgi’s enterprise of selling counterfeit stamp papers across India employed hundreds of people. “The top tier of Telgi’s workforce comprised chartered accountants and senior marketing managers. The bottom tier included over three hundred and fifty agents, graduate sales and marketing executives, delivery teams and telemarketing teams…”

Telgi could not have run the operation without help from politicians and the police. Actually, every powerful person who got wind of his operation extorted from him. He fed them all. By this time, Telgi was already found guilty of forgery and fraud, but the police never arrested him. He was “an absconder.” As for why they couldn’t nab him, the police told the court astonishing things. One excuse of a police officer was, Singh writes, “I was so wrapped up in listening to the court’s verdict that I missed Telgi’s escape from courtroom.”

In return, Telgi enriched all the people who could protect him. So what led to his arrest? What brought him to justice? This is a part of the most underrated question in India. Why do right things happen in the country?

Singh asks Telgi himself to solve the mystery. After Telgi’s enormous tip to the bar dancer, new policemen would keep appearing at his door to extort him. Telgi had no choice. “My paper was like currency too. I gave them my paper, they sold it in the market and earned money.” But then, they “got greedy.” They included the names of Telgi’s wife and children in their charge-sheet against him. They did this to milk him for more money. They had no evidence against Telgi’s family, according to Telgi, but if they could harass them they thought he would pay them more for their freedom. But it was a blunder, on par with Telgi’s generosity to the bar dancer.

Telgi knew that if he yielded once, there would be no end to the extortion. He defied the police, and in a sequence of events, as they tried to build a case against him to wear him down, they created a monster that went out of control. Eventually, rival police groups would, in pure self-interest, set in motion a process they would not be able to control. As it often happens, justice was the accidental outcome of a war between two powerful camps.

Telgi was convicted on several charges and was to spend three decades in prison. But he died in 2017, after about a decade in jail, at the age of 56. Some politicians and several senior police officers were implicated, but they were later deemed innocent.

Telgi’s story, too, could have been different, and of course a secret, if he had invested in his own political clout. Charisma is nonsense. Attend a legislative assembly session, you will be cured of the view that charisma wins elections. Telgi did give away crores in charity, but that was a paltry corporate-social responsibility-like ration compared to his wealth. That was enough, though, to get over 2,000 people to attend his funeral.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





Why psychoanalysis should be kept outside one’s home


2023-09-17

Home psychoanalysis is a modern disorder. More than ever, people are attributing reasons for a person’s behaviour to something not very obvious, like the distant past or sexual melancholy or the subconscious mind. Thus there are claims that a man does not prioritize his family because he had a bad childhood; or that a woman is unhappy in a relationship because she entered it “on the rebound”; or that a child is scared of birds because she once had a frightening toy, and so on. And there are interpretations of dreams where serpents mean sex and public nudity means a sense of inferiority. (A search for meaning in dreams is close to the origins of psychoanalysis—in Sigmund Freud’s fanciful interpretations.) And, of course, people also read “body language”: folded arms are a defensive pose and a rub of the nose signifies lying.

It is hard to dispute that the subconscious mind exists, and that it dictates behaviour. The collective subconscious mind of society is even perceivable, but the mainstream view that the individual subconscious can be read using general cues that hold good for all minds and that such an analysis is a settled science is a marketing triumph of psychoanalysis. The internet has accelerated the transmission of psychoanalytical cues and labels, inserting them into how people think about others.

As recently as a century ago, people did not psychoanalyse much, or at all, as we can deduce from literature that is available to us from many parts of the world. In the Bible, or the great Indian, Greek or Arabic epics, for instance, characters do not perceive an esoteric cause of an effect. Even dreams are only supernatural instructions and not omens of a secret personality. But after Freud grew popular and gave academic sophistication to the religious idea that dreams are allegories, the subconscious assumed the reputation of being our true self, with our public persona a facade. We have never been more unfair to those who love us.

Most people have not read Freud; they are merely under the influence of his insight, which is that we appear to do one thing but something else is going on with us. The actual transmission of psychoanalysis was done by writers. A literary novel, for instance, is almost entirely about what is going on in a character’s mind. And often what is going on is a psychoanalysis of others. Take for instance a strand from The Unbearable Lightness of Being by Milan Kundera. In the novel, a beautiful young woman named Tereza has the habit of studying herself in the mirror. The reason, Kundera says, is that Tereza’s competitive mother had made the girl feel unattractive for years, and now she is liberated. “Now we can better understand the meaning of Tereza’s secret vice, her long looks and frequent glances in the mirror. It was a battle with her mother. It was a longing to be a body unlike other bodies, to find that the surface of her face reflected the crew of the soul charging up from below.”

She is just a young woman checking herself out. Is that so unusual? But then, Tereza is a creation of Kundera, so his psychoanalysis of her cannot be wrong. However, the passage conveys how writers may have infected the world with psychoanalysis, which is often an over-analysis. It approximates how modern people who believe they are ‘perceptive’ think about others, how they unearth delicious connections and how they enjoy the satisfying click of a theory fitting an observation. If Tereza were a real person with a bitter mother, it is highly likely that her long gazes into the mirror would have no deep reason. Also, it is likely that her bad childhood had not adversely affected her at all. This is a point that is hard for many to accept because they are more steeped in psychoanalysis than they know. But in a world addled by psychoanalysis, which came to us first as a pseudoscience, and then as a new way of storytelling, the people around the real Tereza who rate themselves as ‘thinkers’ or as ‘sensitive’ would find meanings in almost everything she did, just as the lover of the fictional Tereza overthinks her rather ordinary vanity.

Today, the influence of psychoanalysis is more direct. There is TikTok psychoanalysis and self-improvement reels on Instagram. The world is suddenly awash in labels, with men who are ‘gaslighting’ and relationships that are ‘toxic,’ and events that are ‘triggering,’ and homes that are ‘dysfunctional,’ and pasts that are ‘traumatic’ and situations that cause ‘panic attacks.’ Some old metaphors, too, have returned, like ‘demons.’ There is no greater sign of psychoanalytical farce today than when people claim they are “fighting their own demons.”

Literature gives an idea of what is going on. Psychoanalysis is at the core of modern literature, but a lot of it is sham even in fine novels. But then there are moments of great insight. In Unbearable Lightness…, Kundera is impressive when he writes how we are torn between gravitas and lightness, the heaviness of love, and the lightness of freedom. Psychoanalysis has some moments of greatness, but mostly it sees too much.

Some people have an intuitive ability to look deep into human nature and see hidden meanings in actions, or to realize there might be no special meanings. Most people do not have that gift, yet they make forays into the minds of others by consulting a spurious map.

It is alright to get an analysis of the Prime Minister or Elon Musk wrong, but people who are more important in our lives do not deserve home psychoanalysis.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





What could possibly ruin the BJP’s dominance one day


2023-09-24

It appears that many politicians across India who are not with the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) live in fear of imprisonment, chiefly for corruption or old crimes. It is odd because, until recently, it was uncommon for politicians in India to be so vulnerable to the justice system. They were protected by an unspoken code. To the extent it was possible, politicians in power guarded their own kind, including the ones not in power. Some did end up in jail. Current home minister Amit Shah was imprisoned in 2010. But those were anomalies in the system. Shah’s tremendous rise explains why. Power is temporary; powerlessness is temporary. Politicians needed to have each other’s back. So what has changed now? Under BJP rule, that code of professional courtesy has vanished.

The reason, I believe, is that the party is so confident of being in power at the centre for the next “30-40 years,” as Shah put it, that the benefits of radiating fear outweigh the risks of breaking a shadowy old code. For the top rung of the BJP, antagonizing other politicians is not a high-stakes gambit.

The BJP is mighty. Even in Karnataka, where it lost elections, it did not lose its voter base; it gained urban voters. As things stand, it is hard to see how the party can lose the general elections next year. It is pragmatic and led by a superstar. Indians may not adore Narendra Modi the way Tamilians loved M.G. Ramachandran, because Indians are not so naive anymore, but Modi is a bigger draw at the polls in many parts of India than MGR ever was in one.

But the end will come for the BJP one day because that is the way of the world. And when it comes, what would be the reason? What could destroy the BJP’s dominance in the future? There would appear to be a host of reasons, but reasons are never equal. It is always a single cause that has an outsized impact on an outcome. What could it be?

An obvious cause would be the departure of Modi from politics. The party surely does have a secret succession plan, but that cannot save it from the curse of the second-best—a phenomenon where strong satraps fight for the throne but no single person can vanquish everyone else, and a weaker leader is hoisted to the top as everyone’s second-best idea. This has been the curse of the Congress party after the demise of Rajiv Gandhi.

The success of Modi’s BJP in part emerges from the fact that he was not the second-best candidate at the time of his ascent. After the party was rattled by a major defeat, the strongest politician in the next generation asked the old lot to fade away, and he quickly become the party’s mascot.

After Modi, it is highly likely that the BJP’s chieftains in the second rung, all equals, will squabble over who should take over. The party would then succumb to the most phoney political ideal in India—that we are “not a presidential system,” that a party need not pitch a prime ministerial face for elections, that the prime minister should be chosen after the results are in. This has been the doom of the Congress, and will likely be the doom of the alliance that is forming against Modi for 2024, and could also be the doom of the BJP after Modi.

But can confusion over leadership alone ruin the BJP ? What about the fact that the BJP represents the modern average Indian, even in the south, in a way no other party does. But then, the Hinduness of the BJP may cease to be special in the future because every party that matters would have a Hindu hue, like the Aam Aadmi Party today does.

The transformation of India from a farcical ‘secular’ republic in theory into a melodramatic Hindu nation in practice hides a weird quality of BJP politics. Hindus do not have real grievances anymore. The BJP has created the world’s only nation where the majority behaves like a wounded minority. That is hard to sustain. The cultural war is over and Hindu dominance has won. There are no open wounds anymore. Already, issues like this-mosque-was-a-temple-once or that-artefact-is-an-idol do not gather political momentum.

When there is this political entropy, and every party is somewhat Hindu in its politics, and the BJP is left without a superstar and is headed by its second-best, the party might splinter. Even if it does not break up, a shock, like a major economic crisis or a pandemic, could upset the middle classes and youth, who would then suddenly find moral reasons to vote the party out of power. People live with a sense of failure and every decade or so, they need to blame it on politics. How long can the BJP escape that?

These factors that may ruin the BJP’s run presume that there would be professional political figures who would be able to exploit the scenario. But very often, what trounces a giant is an amateur with an amateurish idea. Like a fabulous orator who says he has had enough. Of what, we do not know. At any point in civilization, someone has to just say he has “had enough” and everyone appears to get it. Assume that this someone forms a ‘10-year-party’ which promises that after ten years of fixing the nation, it would be dissolved and none of its members will contest elections again, exhibiting a supreme sacrifice of power which Indians so love.

If this sounds far-fetched, that is the point. An amateur idea evolves in unexpected ways because its prophet is not professional enough to know it is far-fetched. At the peak of the anti-corruption movement, Anna Hazare wanted a fellowship to police elected politicians, a fellowship of unelected people whose qualification was that they had won a Filipino award called the Magsaysay.





In memory of Gandhi’s encounters with bio-hacking


2023-10-01

He was the kind of man who could dissuade people from calling him “Mahatma” without making them laugh. What created an added aura around him was that he could do extreme things to his body, some of which were not called “intermittent fasting” then. More than once, Mohandas Gandhi fasted for 21 days, surviving only on water and perhaps a bit of salt and lime. Once, he almost died. “Government bulletins prepared Indians for news of his death,” Time magazine reported. There was a sacrificial quality to his fasts. But then he probably liked fasts. Some of them were surely ordeals, but he probably liked ordeals too. He brought to his politics something that came easily to him but which others found daunting.

In his time, Gandhi was a puzzling person and he belonged to a country where puzzling people who went without food were allotted noble reasons and consecrated as saints. Usually, such saints don’t complain, but this man denied he was one. Yet, what else could people do other than helplessly adore him as a spiritual being? But now, we can get a closer glimpse of his personality because our present is filled with ascetics who do extreme things to their bodies and are not great souls.

The present clarifies the past. And what it clarifies is that Gandhi was a bio-hacker. To the extent it was technologically possible in his time, he did things to his body, listened and tweaked, and went on experimenting with himself. He did not perform “experiments with truth,” for the whole point of an experiment is that one does not know the truth. What he did was use his capacity for ordeals to toy with his own body. It was not always pleasant. As is the fate of all bio-hackers, Gandhi suffered from diet-induced gloom, headaches and fevers.

He was in pursuit of the perfect diet; he discovered the power of uncooked vegetables long before salads grew famous, he was an early prophet of soya beans; he drank goat milk, went to places with a goat. He practised sexual abstinence not by fleeing women, but by testing his resolve in close proximity.

Silicon Valley today has millionaires who don’t look anything like Gandhi, but they fast for days, monitor through devices every small thing food does to their bodies, stand for hours because sitting is decadence, and hold pleasure inferior to pain. Like Gandhi, they are able to convert themselves into labs because they have a capacity to endure ordeals, even enjoy some of it. If they had taken this capacity for pain to fight for a cause in another time, or even today, they would be called saints. Just like hallucinators of today were celebrated as seers in another time.

Across time, cults sprang from men who pushed their bodies to the limits. In Gem in the Lotus, a captivating book about “the seeding of Indian civilisation,” Abraham Eraly talks about the time when Siddhartha, the son of a tribal chieftain and one of the best documented ancient public figures, gives in to a long nagging desire to abandon the good life. He goes to live in a forest. His baffled father sends a priest after the boy to persuade him back. “Religion is not wrought out only in the forests,” the priest tells the boy, “The salvation of ascetics can be accomplished even in a city.” It didn’t work.

Siddhartha, on his way to becoming the Buddha, interviews the bio-hackers of his time, who were known as sages. One of them tells him, “By the path of pain they (the sages) eventually attain happiness—pain , they say, is the root of merit.” In the pursuit of pain, young Siddhartha, “… plucked out my hair and beard, and kept the practice up. I always stood, refusing to sit down. I was a squatter on my heels, upon a bed of thorns…The dirt of many season gathered on my body… I lived even on my own excrements. To such extremes did I go… as to live on filth for food…”

Despite all this, he doesn’t attain ‘enlightenment,’ something people down the eras have pretended to understand. In pursuit of this phenomenon, Siddhartha begins to starve. All through the ordeal, he documents the reactions on his body.

That is very Gandhi, very Silicon Valley. Siddhartha starves so much that, he says, when he presses his navel, he feels his spine. When he eventually became the Buddha, he was quite a spectacle. He walked in a shroud of numerous austere monks. Many people tried to imitate him, as later humans would imitate Gandhi. What the imitators did not grasp was that pain is a talent; those who seek it are made that way, and they are very few. They rate it higher than pleasure. If you take out the rumour of philosophy from this, it would merely be a mental state.

Gandhi’s son Harilal took fine digs at his father’s asceticism. In an article by the Swedish writer Zac O’Yeah, I found this comment by Harilal: “I cannot believe that a salt-free diet or abstinence from ghee or milk indicates strength of character and morality…” Of millions of Indians who undertake long fasts, Harilal wrote, “…barring a few exceptions, they possess no sterling virtues.”

The ordinariness of ascetics is another thing the present clarifies. Silicon Valley’s fitness bros, for instance, suffer for a very material reason—to extend their youth by decades.

And so it has been for centuries. Some people have a capacity for ordeals and a need to understand their own bodies through trauma; often, they are misunderstood and overestimated; then millions who ail from normalcy attempt to ape them and suffer without deriving any pleasure from it.





Is it illegal in India to push views that China may like?


2023-10-08

The activist outfit, Newsclick, is under attack from the Indian government on the suspicion that it is funded by China to unsettle India. Its founder Prabir Purkayastha has been arrested and at the time of filing this column was held under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, one of those stringent laws that has introduced many Indians to the word ‘draconian.’ Several freelancers who had contributed to the site were questioned for hours by the Delhi police, and many more are deemed “suspects.” Mainstream journalistic bodies see in this episode yet another effort by the government to intimidate its foes. They are not wrong, but Newsclick does not emerge well at all.

The police has leaked to the media that Newsclick has received about ₹38 crore in donations since 2017 from non-profits and shell companies linked to a wealthy American named Neville Roy Singham who considers himself a “Marxist” and has close links to the Chinese government. Whatever the actual figure, it does appear that Singham funnelled crores into an outfit that is practically not worth a fraction of that. So what was Singham buying; what was Newsclick selling? If Newsclick is a journalistic organization, then it appears shady. As a pressure group, it fares a bit better, but morally it is in the grey area. In either case, there is no evidence that it is a criminal syndicate. The government, once again, has used disproportionate force against activists.

It has been probing Newsclick for three years using its formidable powers, including those of the Enforcement Directorate, and has found nothing substantive to prove Newsclick is waging a war against India on China’s behalf. The First Information Report against Purkayastha, which the Delhi police only reluctantly showed him after a court order to do so, makes vague claims.

Over the years, the Bharatiya Janata Party’s government has demonstrated a special concern for not-for-profit organizations. It is as though the party is privy to their secret powers. After all, one of them, the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, did help bag India for the party. So maybe other not-for-profits can do it for others?

Over the past decade, the government has created an environment of fear among activists who are critical of it. Some have been jailed for years on feeble grounds. As a result, India has acquired a poor global reputation, by which we of course mean a reputation in the West. India is just a little better than China and Russia in Western perceptions of freedom. Why it is not in the same league is probably because it is convenient for the West to imagine that the largest democracy in the world is a better place than China or Russia. The Newsclick case, though, adds some credibility to India’s suspicions of the organized empathy industry.

In August, The New York Times ran a story that portrayed Singham as a shadowy millionaire who indirectly funded several organizations around the world to promote China’s point of view. One of the operations he funded through the circuitous route, the report states, was Newsclick.

In several parts of the world, Singham’s intervention created “a seemingly organic bloom of far-left groups that echo Chinese government talking points, echo one another, and are echoed in turn by the Chinese state media… These groups operate in coordination. They have cross-posted articles and shared one another’s content on social media hundreds of times.”

The NYT had reported on Singham before. In a 2021 story, ‘How Beijing influences the influencers,’ it reported that some American social media influencers who showed a pleasant side of China or transmitted fake news that vilified the US were funded by China. But it would be unthinkable for the US government to imprison such influencers under an anti-terror law. Freedom is a habit, and America has had it much longer than India. And freedom should ideally include the right to be morally grey or even corrupt, as long as one does not pose a danger to others.

In that light, it makes sense for Indian journalists who are not aligned with the BJP to condemn the disproportionate use of state power on an activist who may at worst have hustled some funds. If the money was for promoting Chinese propaganda, Newsclick has done such a bad job China should be more livid than India.

Newsclick, in its feeble defence, has not denied it took Singham’s money. It has said that no matter who funded it, it remains “independent.” Maybe the views of Purkayastha, who has never hidden his affection for the communist movement in India, were so aligned with Singham’s that the millionaire did not have to bribe anyone. He had to just help Newsclick survive.

But even if, for a moment, we accept that Purkayastha accepted money to promote China’s views, is it illegal? Unethical maybe, as all of sponsored activism is, but illegal? He did not try to create an insurrection or cause any injury. Does India not allow us the freedom to make a living off propaganda?

Indian activists who have faced similar trouble from the government in the past have gone to the Supreme Court with pious claims of innocence. It would be more meaningful if they instead went asking if they, like Americans, have a right to non-criminal propaganda, and if they do, do they have the right to access foreign funds? That would settle the whole business once and for all. Otherwise, the government will have an upper hand. So often, what people need but never ask for is the right to mediocrity.





Palestinians will do better without long-distance lovers


2023-10-15

The fortune of Israel was that it made for very bland photojournalism. All the trauma of the Levant was on the other side of the fence, in Gaza. That changed on 7 October when Hamas terrorists killed over a thousand Israelis in their homes, and not all of them were killed “with guns”, in the words of an Israeli spokesperson.

It was an exceptional event, and it was followed by a common phenomenon—a torrent of low-stakes rage from people who lived far away from the region. The Israel-Palestine issue has for long been the world’s biggest source of cheap rage, from both Muslims and those who despise them. There is a serious problem with the strong opinions of people who do not have to bear the consequences of their opinions.

After the massacres of Israelis, Muslims in many parts of the world rejoiced. Muslims in Western Europe and America took out festive processions in support of Palestine Arabs. The affluent Muslim elite from poor nations who migrated to the West usually are too sophisticated to expose their inner glee at a triumph for the Muslim world. Usually, their emotions in favour of Palestinians comes across as their love for humanity because usually it is Palestinian “civilians” who die, not a thousand Israelis. Habituated to operating under the cloak of empathy, Fatima Bhutto reposted an activist’s tweet, “It must be emphasised that armed struggle by the Palestinian resistance against the occupier is legal under international law.” Other people with facades of modernity said similar things. Many refined people with Muslim names, in a remarkable coincidence, blamed Israel for the violence. All this not even a day since the massacre, which had the effect of endorsing Hamas’s action. Some students of Harvard signed a joint letter condemning Israel. The wokes are the petition-signing zombies of the new world. In my experience, wokes are people so bereft of innate morality that they have to make bad guesses about what goodness might be.

All sane people have the same values, certainly, but it is the secret hierarchy in which we hold them that distinguishes us. Even atheists have a religious identity, especially Muslim atheists, and in the past few days, it appeared that they hold that identity more dear than their love for unbranded human lives. Yet, the global Muslim identity has been useless to Palestinians. No one wants them in their backyard; they only “stand with Palestine”. Palestinians have gained less from Muslim sympathy than from the crumbs falling off Israel’s capitalism. All that the Muslim identity has done is stoke the violence and give Palestinians the false hope that if some of them keep getting blown off, one day Palestine will be theirs.

Back home, the Indian National Congress is afraid to condemn Hamas. Amid all this, many Hindus have been wishing for Israel to obliterate Gaza as though it is just a video game. Across the world, people who hate Islam have donned the cloak of humanism to ask Israel for a spectacular retribution. Israel has no choice but to do something of that sort, and we know that its people will once again pay the price.

The way the world uses the word “civilians” to describe most Palestinians, it is as though everyone except me has a secret way to distinguish who there belongs to Hamas and who is an innocent victim. Maybe what the world is trying to say is that most humans are not terrorists; they may now and then celebrate murder, but they are not directly barbarians. I can’t argue with that.

But I do wonder what was running in the heads of Palestinian “civilians” in 2006 when over 44% of them elected Hamas to power in elections considered free and fair. More important is the fact that the Palestinians did pay the price for that mistake. They have directly borne the effects of Israeli colonisation. Their children have died, their lovers have died, they have no hope, no future. Of all the “civilians” in the world, they have paid the highest price. Their emotions have meaning. Even when they rejoiced the massacre of a thousand people.

It would be fascinating to know what they have to say about the rich Palestinian Arabs who had the means to escape, who settled in the West, and who goad poor Palestinians to fight from faraway. The long-distance Asian feudal lords in the West who want to hire martyrs, we know them. We have seen the displaced Sri Lankan Tamil elite funding the LTTE. When the violent end came for hundreds of impoverished Tamil “civilians”, the emotional elite were safely in England and other such places. We have seen the affluent Kashmiris in Dubai and New York goad impoverished Kashmiris to become militants or at least stone-pelters; they defamed every local Kashmiri who wished for peace. We have seen some Canadians of Punjabi origin destroy whole generations in Punjab. And, we have seen non resident Indians celebrate the rise of a new Hindu India.

But I see the long-distance Jewish identity very differently. Even before Adolf Hitler, they were massacred across Europe. Driven from all lands, they hid in something called assimilation. But then some of them had the bizarre idea of colonizing a piece of Arab land. Of course, they took it from poor Arab farmers, who were though treated worse by richer Arabs. And suddenly there was a Jewish land. Everything that happens to Israel and everything Israel does affect the fates of every Semitic Jew anywhere. We will realize this in the coming days when there are stray “lone-wolf” attacks on Jews in some of the most advanced cities of the world.





What the Palestine conflict says about human nature


2023-10-22

If 2,000 heavily armed terrorists have a free rein inside a nation they despise, how many people do you imagine they would kill? On 7 October, nearly 2,000 Hamas terrorists infiltrated Israel; they killed about 1,400. This points to the likelihood that some or many Hamas terrorists did not kill anyone that day. What did they do? Just walked around? I think so. The terrorists did injure over 3,000, and took over 200 hostages; even so, considering the fact that thousands of civilians were entirely at the mercy of terrorists for hours, what explains a death toll that is less than the number of militants? Even if you discard Israel’s assessment of 2,000 terrorists, there appears little dispute that over 1,000 had entered Israel. Why was the massacre disproportionate to what we imagine would happen if 1,000 to 2,000 terrorists walked into our residential areas carrying machine guns, rocket launchers and grenades? We can argue that the areas along the Gaza-Israel border were not densely populated. But at one of the first targets, the Supernova Music festival, there were over 3,000 in attendance. Here, about 250 were killed. We can argue that maybe thousands managed to flee at the first sign of trouble; they scattered and they hid. But what if something else was at play?

What if some or many terrorists were incapable of being as barbaric as they had fantasized? This is not unusual. In Afghanistan, some suicide bombers were known to veer away from crowded parts and detonate the bomb in quieter places. In the 1863 Battle of Gettysburg during the American Civil War, most soldiers refused to fire, writes Rutger Bregman in his book, Humankind: A Hopeful History. They even pretended to fire, and reload, to appease their superiors.

The latest phase in the Israel-Palestine conflict is uniquely brutal for Israel, and brutal in a very familiar way for Palestinians. At first glance, it makes us lose hope in humanity, in our most important hypothesis that there is some point in human life, that we may not exactly know what that point is, but it somehow involves our revulsion for barbarity. But we just need to look more carefully at the world’s desperate attempts to persuade Israel to realize what it already knows, that “revenge is a lazy form of grief,” as a character says in the film The Interpreter.

Most people attach a high value to human life, including that of people they despise. I do not say this makes us safer. In fact, this makes us unsafe. In a world where most people are incapable of killing, a few demented people can be highly efficient at it. I only say that there is hope because peace appears to be natural to humans. Maybe it is not as ancient as humans, maybe it is not a primordial thing, but it is now at the heart of all modern human societies.

This is also the reason why Palestine’s public relations always trumps Israel’s. Even though over 1,000 Jews were massacred, some of them brutally, the moral high ground shifted from Israel in just a day—to Palestinian Arabs. This is because consciously and unconsciously the world wants to protect Palestinians from Israeli vengeance. Consciously and unconsciously, they can see what had happened to the region’s Arabs. They were ‘the natives’ barely considered human by early European settlers, an experience Indians and indigenous people everywhere suffered. Such natives were usually obliterated so completely, there was no question of festering political wounds. But by the time European Jews had colonized Palestine, Europeans had lost the moral capacity for the obliteration of natives. So, maybe, even in the festering of a historical wound, there is evidence of human compassion. The Jews of the 1940s, victims and survivors of genocides themselves, could not commit a genocide, however convenient that may have been.

It may not seem at first glance that many conservative Hindus care for Palestinians. Social media amplifies a particular sort of people and bots. I can easily believe news reports that a lot of anti-Palestine fake news emerges from India. Even so, I sense that the sympathy of the average Hindu is with Palestinians. This is because people, in general, are conservative when the stakes are high, when stuff directly affects them, and liberal when the stakes are low, as in international affairs. People need to take a tough stance to protect their home and way of life, and because of that they need to compensate by taking up just causes far away. Palestine is that just cause. This is why there is no such thing as a global right-wing, while liberals are a global monoculture. This is why a high proportion of Hindus are unlikely to back Israel, and many Israelis probably have deep sympathy for the plight of Indian Muslims. This too points to the humane drift of modern societies.

Indians who think they despise Palestinians, I suspect, do not really despise Arabs they have never met; they only despise sanctimonious posh preachers here in India. They need to take the opposite view of the sermonizing intellectuals who annoy them. So, perhaps, most of the venom on social media is not as bad as it seems.

As I write this, there are several videos of kids covered in cement and dried blood, quaking, as though an explosion is still reverberating in their slight bodies. Every time we figure out that an image of this nature is not from Palestine, we feel some relief. As though these kids covered in cement and blood never existed. Maybe a time will come when these things never happen anywhere, that they become obsolete, like psychotic European explorers.





The loneliness of Israel is a punishment for its strength


2023-10-29

Gaza is rubble, but Palestinians somehow always find clean white shrouds for their dead. Children are dying there, their parents too, and the young, and those who surprisingly managed to grow old. To feel deeply for Palestinians, all we need is a brain and a heart. But to feel the loneliness of Israel, we need some courage.

Imagine a person who watches the film Avatar and is on the side of humans, who appear to be not only Americans of the future but also Donald Trump’s base. There is something of the West Asian problem in the film. Humans use their superior technology to enslave an indigenous species on another planet. They need to colonize other worlds to survive because Earth is finished. They have to choose between being the oppressor or going extinct. This is not a moral basis to harm natives; yet, practically, there is no other way, which the story does not convey because a story is a corrupt thing. In any case, which sane person, especially in the East, would sympathize with the Caucasian colonizer? This also explains the loneliness of Israel.

It is the loneliness of the strong, of people who have won for now. It is also a modern loneliness because for centuries the strong just finished off the weak, and that was it. But the same cultural advancement that gave Israel its dazzling science and tech, and the weapons that subjugated Palestinians, also consecrated a view that the purpose of the strong is to take care of the unlucky, not finish them off. Yet, Israel believes it has only two choices—be the oppressor or vanish from the face of Earth. There is historical precedence, including one on 7 October. Yet no one else accepts that. The world has the luxury to disagree, spouting esoteric ideals.

Very late in the 19th century, Israel was thought up by a British Jewish elite. The proposal of Jews, persecuted everywhere, reclaiming their sacred land which was now occupied by Arabs, seems ludicrous today. But it was the golden age of the elites, and it was also the golden age of White supremacy. Such ideas could be thought up because of an interesting quality of Europeans of the time—not all of them saw other people as people.

In the book My Promised Land by Ari Shavit, whose great grandfather Herbet Bentwich was one of the founders of what would become Israel, he expresses his wonderment at his ancestor’s eyesight. “There are more than half a million Arabs, bedouins, and Druze in Palestine in 1897… How can the hawk-eyed Bentwich not see… that the Land is taken? That there is another people now occupying the land of his ancestors?” The Arabs were so poor, “they are hardly noticeable to a Victorian gentleman.”

Israel’s moral defence is that people of today cannot imagine some aspects of human life many decades ago. How worthless land was, and that millions were stateless, and that the Arabs in Palestine did not have a sense of identity as Palestinians. “There is no particular reason for the Arabs to cling to these few kilometers,” writes Shavit. He quotes the 19th century Jewish writer Israel Zangwill: “To fold their tents and silently steal away is their proverbial habit: let them exemplify it now…We must gently persuade them to trek.”

This was how most of us came to occupy places we claim is our ‘home’—when our ancestors inspired tribals to “fold their tents” and leave, or were made to vanish in more brutal ways. But the Jews returned too late to their ancient land; by then, history had somehow grown eyes. In the beginning, Arabs and Jews co-existed, despite sporadic instances of violence. In time, the violence got more frequent and nastier, and the Jewish elite realized that they would need their own country with no Arabs in it. They massacred some and drove most of them away.

Israel’s founding Jews, the economic elite of Europe, left everything and went to an arid land, but they could raise a prosperous state because once you have wealth, you can be rich again. Wealth is a muscle memory.

Arab kingdoms did not recognize Israel’s right to exist at the time of its creation. They refused the offer of a two-state solution, the creation of Palestine and Israel. A day after the formation of Israel on 14 May 1948, it was invaded by the forces of Egypt, Jordan, Iraq, Syria and Lebanon. Israel prevailed. What a nation, much of the world gushed.

Shavit invokes an argument made by the ‘French physiologist’ Claude Bernard to explain the psyche of modern Israel. One of our most famous misconceptions is that life survives by adapting to environment. “Adjustment to the surrounding environment is death… the phenomena of life is that of preserving an internal environment contrary to an outside environment.”

And we come to the very core of not only Israel but all strong people. But the world can’t stand the strong. In return for compassion, the world wants you to kneel and crawl and cry. And Israel is bad at it. In its formative years, it asked its own Jews to shut up about the Holocaust and stop whining. Israel is built on strength and optimism. It is also built on paranoia, but then it is not paranoia if you are right.

Israel fears it can be obliterated any day. A strong and prosperous Palestine is too dangerous for it; Israel needs a buffer zone. Yes, we can write a beautiful sad poem about real people who live in the buffer zone; it would be an easy poem. The poem that is hard to write is the poem that can convey what Golda Meir once said, “Every civilization finds it necessary to negotiate compromises with its own values.”





The mystery of why siblings are often useless or worse


2023-11-05

The relationship that people are most likely to squander is probably not marriage, but the bond with their sibling. A large number of people appear to have useless relations with their siblings. In many cases, they hate each other. In fact, for many people, their arch-enemy is the sibling. It is true that when a person dies of unnatural causes, the spouse is a natural suspect; but so is the sibling. This is especially so in affluent families that have more resources to share than miseries to bind the flock.

Yet, modern couples who are still in the shock of new parenthood go through further agony to have a second child quickly as a way of producing a captive companion for the older one. For a few years of convenient play dates, have they produced a lifelong wound?

Siblings do greatly enhance the life of a child, but chances are that in just a few years they will drift apart or might even be harmful. Some pleasantness may endure if they live apart and their visits are rationed; but if they are housemates, they may find reasons to hate each other. I think siblings are like spouses, but without the conciliatory sex and children to keep them together.

This is an immense waste of a very important bond with a person who is unique and cannot be duplicated. I am aware that not all siblings get estranged. I even know some adults who can vacation with their siblings. I knew a 98-year-old woman who for years used to speak almost every day to her nonagenarian sister on the telephone, chiefly to complain about her children; both of them so deaf that they had to put the other on speaker mode and talk aloud, somehow unaware that their households could hear every unkind word. I myself am a huge beneficiary of having a sibling, a sister who was just over a year older than me, who saved me in many ways when we are growing up. As kids, when we watched Tamil films in which a sibling fought another over mere wealth, we were at first perplexed by the unconvincing plot. Later, when we learnt that this was a way of the world, we pledged that we will never become such siblings. We were true to our oaths, chiefly because our parents ensured that they would never pass on any wealth to us. I guess adversities minus parental wealth brings siblings closer.

Our relationship, though, is not the norm. I have seen how other siblings evolved. When they were children, they were thick and their lives were filled with each other. In their 20s, they would grow aware of their luck. I used to know a brother and sister who would slow dance together.

Okay, maybe that was weird. But generally siblings do grow fonder of each other as they hit their 20s. Somewhere along the way, many of them part ways in acrimony. I had a friend whose elder brother was her hero in her teens, but when I met her recently, she was disappointed in him. I do not take seriously the disappointment of wives in husbands, but when women lose respect or love for their brothers, I wonder what happened. I realize that the disenchantments of women with their brothers appear to be common. Brothers, it seems, palm off all their responsibilities towards their parents onto their sisters and get immersed in their new families. Or they blow up their parents’ savings on doomed startups or, strangely, on their own opulent weddings. Of course, there are also sisters who have never got along for no worthy reason beyond simple envies masquerading as deep psychoanalyses of the other’s character.

Business families are the mascots of sibling discord. The most potent danger to a family business is not debt, but the fragility of sibling bonds. That sort of end even appears inevitable. Businesses that are run by siblings do recognize this fact and try to take measures. For instance, a gold-loan business in Kerala run by three brothers has a tacit understanding that the eldest brother would be a benign dictator because democracy is inefficient. They do have disputes, but also a system of resolving them, which is one of the tightly guarded secrets of the family.

It is surprising that there are marriage counsellors but no specialized sibling counsellors. I am not an admirer of counselling. It is mostly nonsense, but I can still see the point in making people talk about what they usually never tell others. A strange thing about marriage counselling is that it is sought after a problem begins. Maybe counselling would have some use when it comes to the central players before they begin to hate each other. Catholics practise something of this sort but in a hilarious way. The marriage counselling is done before marriage, but by a priest who has never married and does not know anything about conjugal relations, at least officially.

I have a startup idea, on which I also claim my copyright. Imagine a network of siblings who counsel others siblings when they are still children, and also at other stages of life. Most siblings, when they are children, are people in love. They never say it to their siblings but they are in love. When people in love hear what is coming at them in the future, they may believe such things happen only to other people. But eventually when they do face what was prophesied, they would realize something important—that what they are enduring is not unique to them, it is human nature. This can help them forgive more easily.

This is an age that defames marriage, at least among heterosexuals. But the extent of acrimony between siblings should make us view marriages with greater respect.





What makes people risk their lives for the sake of others?


2023-11-09

When I meet humanitarians, I usually ask them how they got there. What happened? So, when a volunteer at the Bangkok Literature Festival, an Egyptian pharmacist, told me that he was with the Red Cross, it was inevitable that I would ask the Arab why. The objective of a question might be an answer, but a question also invokes the spirits hidden in a person.

The humanitarians we usually hear from are bosses and not field workers. Mustafa Marwan is a worker, who may be found in an ambulance or aid truck in some strife-torn place. He has the look of a man who perceives the world with all his senses, who is very alert for no special reason, or maybe it is just his large eyes. He has seen death from very close. Once in Libya, a man walking in front of him was shot dead by a sniper. He has been to Gaza before, and might go again.

On his way to meet me in a cafe, Marwan got wet in the rain. By wet I mean wet in a tropical way, completely drenched, clothes clinging to him and water dripping from arms. He has a lot of hair, so there was that problem too. He walks in this way, sits across the table casually and reads the menu. As though on Wednesdays, he shows up this way at cafes. I wait to see if he is only hiding his embarrassment behind the menu, but he actually orders a dish.

The Red Cross is looking for Arabic-speakers to go into Gaza and Marwan is thinking of applying. Why would an educated Arab who can make a decent living selling aspirin and Viagra in Cairo choose to get so close to death, and other realities?

“People who join the Red Cross are either running away from something, or running towards something,” he says. He is a poetic Arab; assuming there is another kind. There is an emptiness in the core of people, he says, they need to fill it with meaning. There is boredom. “Boredom is a dangerous thing.” And once you have seen war, it is terrifying, horrible, “but it’s also adrenaline.”

When you are inside a war, he says, you live in the present, only in the present. Many East Asian men in maroon robes have told us that we must live “in the present.” This state has names like “mindfulness.” Yet, the modern world is a consequence of ancient humans fleeing from that terrible state, from all that boredom. We glorify living in the present when we do not know what it is or when it’s a weekend luxury in a charlatan retreat. But in a war, Marwan says, there is no other way to be, but to live in the present. You acquire an acute focus on survival. Something about his tone suggests it is exciting, but exciting in a way that makes ‘exciting’ an inappropriate word for it. In that state, happiness comes in unexpected ways. Once in a war-torn place, “we found some mineral water bottles. We were running short of water. And the bottles made us ecstatic. I still remember how they made feel. They were just bottles of water.”

So far, Marwan has described humanitarianism without once referring to it as something noble. Doesn’t he think he is better than most people? Better than me? He risks his life to take medication to people whose curse not many wish to share. Yet, Marwan frames his calling as a compulsion more than an act of goodness.

Many people are drawn to professional humanitarian activities, but most of them quit soon. What makes some people endure as humanitarians?

Marwan is reminded of what one of his bosses once said. Something about how idealism is like oil, and practicality is like water. They don’t mix and you must accept that, instead of shaking the bottle all the time. Most people who wish to be humanitarians are idealists, but like all useful things, professional humanitarianism is a practical thing and the idealists cannot take that. There is a moral force in organized empathy, but it is mostly about getting things done. The Red Cross, for instance, does not try to end wars; that is not its business.

So, humanitarians who endure are probably practical people, who may have some ethical convictions but do not ail from religion-grade ideology, who see human nature not as a problem that needs to resolved but as evidence of what the world is.

I tell Marwan that I find humanitarianism a magnet for people with poor mental health. This could be true of writing too; depressed writers are likely to consider themselves humanitarians. If you walk into a conference of real-estate developers and then a gathering of humanitarians, your chances of finding people who rate their own mental health as poor would be higher among the latter. Marwan does not dismiss it, but then he does not dismiss anything.

Is it another thing they are running away from? Their own issues? Or, I wonder, is it what they are running towards? It is not just the adrenaline that makes them seek the trauma of conflict. Maybe they seek people who suffer more than them.

Marwan says there is a more banal reason why people become humanitarians, especially for Western organizations. The money. The West needs to hire locals. And a modest Western salary can help a person lead a comfortable life in most Asian and African countries. “It is also tax-free.”





Why wealthy sporting legends don’t mind looking silly in ads


2023-11-20

For nearly a quarter century, when Sachin Tendulkar played cricket in front of half the world, he did nothing for a moment that would make us laugh at him. As long as it was cricket, actually as long as it was the real world, he did everything right. Even when he stood on the field with his hands on his waist, one thought that is the way to stand on the field. But when ads would come on featuring him, he could make us cringe. His peers, too. It bothered us a bit to see them this way, but we understood money. They had a limited time in the sun, and the match fees was modest, so they needed to endorse products. But then, many of them are still at it.

They have all retired as very wealthy men, and they have been consecrated as legends, and they continue to ham in bad ads flogging products like mutual funds and engine oil. When I see Tendulkar now, I wonder why a sporting icon would wear a costume that I somehow remember as a red onesie and flog an app to sell used cars? How much money is enough for legends to quit doing this?

I am not saying there is anything wrong in icons appearing in ads. This column is an expression of my own incomprehension at why legends who took great care to be elegant and correct when they played their sports, do not seem to care about a loss of dignity appearing in mediocre ads. For very wealthy men, who are also national treasures, how much money is enough money?

When we look at the phenomenon without sanctimony, and when we look at the world not as a problem that needs to be solved, but as plain evidence of what people are, we can begin to see an aspect of life that is not intuitive.

Advertisements can enhance the myth of a sport star, as they did with Michael Jordan. But when the success of a commercial does not depend on the glorification of the athlete who is endorsing it, and the product itself has nothing to do with any sport, we see our legends getting diminished. But they seem to think it is worth the price, which is what is interesting about the phenomenon.

In any case, this form of diminishing is better than what the first generation of cricket legends endured after retirement. When I was a reporter for a magazine, I would call up some of them for quotes, and they would ask for money. One of them held on to the last shred of his dignity by trying to make it look like a joke, but he truly was broke and needed money. There was also a West Indian legend, and if you knew who he was you wouldn’t believe it, who used to ask for money for interviews, not out of greed or bitterness, but because he needed it.

When I ask people why wealthy sporting legends still do ads, that too ads that make them look bad, almost everyone tells me that they do it to stay “relevant,” to remain in our porous heads.

I am not so convinced. I think it is just about the money. It is easy money. Normally, an endorsement just takes a day’s work and could be worth crores.

If Don Bradman were alive today, what is the value he would put on accepting, say, a Fevicol commercial? I think he wouldn’t do it. He did appear in ads, though, but he promoted only sports equipment. He also promoted “road safety,” strangely not to protect drivers from other drivers, but to protect Australian boys who played cricket on the road from vehicles. The boxer Muhammad Ali, too, has appeared in commercials, but from what I gather, these were advertisements that promoted sporting goods, and so it should not surprise us that these ads needed to venerate him. Those legends emerged well from their commercial appearances.

Cricket is a paradise for advertisements. They can be run at the end of every over. As a result, there are a lot of commercials during a match and a lot of money in product endorsements. It must be hard for cricket legends to resist the temptation of being paid a lot of money to look silly.

There is a difference between a legendary actor endorsing a product and a great athlete doing the same. Actors are professional entertainers in the business of farce. The legend of an actor depends not on fans understanding him, but in misunderstanding him. In a great actor, people see what they want to see; that is exactly what makes him great. So the aura of an Amitabh Bachchan or a Shah Rukh Khan is not diminished by the farce of product endorsement. A great athlete, however, is the exact opposite of an actor. He is adored by fans for what is real about him. A cricket fan loves Tendulkar because the fan is almost a historian of the game.

Some sport stars, though, are gifted with the lightness of actors. There are even some sporting legends without gravitas. Take Diego Maradona, for example. A man who did drugs and sought paid sex openly, he could probably have done any silly ad without diminishing himself as a football legend.

Also, take Hardik Pandya’s underwear commercial currently airing. It is interesting that one cricketer who does not look silly in an ad is a guy posing in an underwear. He has the physique for it; and the ad’s central focus itself is dependent on making him look great. And his own myth helps, that he is a cool cucumber.

If there is an Indian cricket legend who is in good shape, how much would it cost to get him to do such an underwear commercial? Suddenly, we begin to understand the matter of public dignity, and the fact that an endorsement fee, like your salary, is a payment given not for what you do, but for what you don’t want to do.





Indians seem to love the circus of a rescue more than saving people


2023-12-03

The way India rescues Indians, it is as though the nation values life. But India, in my view, cares very little; it just likes the spectacle of a rescue. A rescue by India is like a frantic ambulance carrying a man it had run over in the first place.

A few days ago, 41 construction workers were rescued 17 days after they were entombed in a collapsed tunnel. As they emerged, they were cheered by a festive crowd of people who belonged to the same social classes as their masters, some of whom chanted compliments for Prime Minister Narendra Modi. Among the receivers of the workers was Uttarakhand Chief Minister Pushkar Singh Dhami. The rescue had been a news drama for days. What was not news was that India had, in very Indian ways, probably put the workers in danger.

India has given us very little information about the cause of the tunnel collapse, which was probably caused by a landslide, exactly the sort of danger some people, including a panel appointed by the Supreme Court, had warned of. The tunnel is part of a highway project in a fragile section of the Himalayas, which is prone to landslides and flooding. The project attracted environmental and safety concerns, which the government overcame through a ruse it has adopted to defeat activism. The New York Times reported, “The government had chopped up the project into 53 pieces, each under the 100-kilometer requirement for mandatory environmental impact assessments.” The government also invoked national security, as the road is vital for military movements.

We can say accidents do happen everywhere in the world, including places that assign a high value to life. And there is a reasonable argument that environmentalists don’t like any infrastructural projects while people like to travel fast between two points, so governments across the world develop tricks to defeat them. But often, people die in India not because of some freak bad luck, but because India did not do enough for safety, especially of the poor. Some of the rescuers of the trapped construction workers themselves had jobs that do not exist in more compassionate societies. They are ‘rat-miners,’ agile men who have the capability to burrow through tight spaces, as rats do. They are used to extract a type of coal so that their employers do not have to use robots, which are more expensive than poor Indians.

The primary rescue mission had tried to reach the trapped workers by using machines to cut through rocky debris, but suffered setbacks towards the end as hardware broke down. So humans had to squeeze and scrape to complete the final few metres of the rescue. That was when ‘rat-miners,’ who were also impoverished enough to do this sort of stuff, were called in. ‘Rat-mining’ is illegal in India because India is good at theory. India knows that some things are too dangerous for human beings, even if they are willing to take the risk, but in practice this sort of mining is prevalent in some mines because that is how the nation is. The ‘rat-miners’ themselves deny that there is any ‘rat-mining’ anymore because that would be awkward for everyone. They gave some vague reasons why they still exist, which I have not fully understood. In any case, I hear they turned out to be crucial after the machines failed. Everything that is wrong with India is compensation for our inability to do the right things the right way.

Yet, when the trapped construction workers finally emerged, there was only national pride. It was as though we are tired of shame. TV channels rejoiced. Politicians garlanded the workers for cameras. Maybe we are not a serious people, maybe we tend to veer towards farce.

India cheapens life, yet there is something about a rescue that captivates Indians. Think of what happens when a human organ is transported across cities to some man in need. Traffic comes to a standstill; a van races to the airport; a plane leaves; the traffic in another city comes to a standstill as the organ is taken to a hospital. You won’t guess life is this valuable by what Indians eat, or the toxins that go into medicines for the poor; and the fact that erratic refrigeration halves the efficacy of most vaccines. People fall off trains because there are no doors; trains themselves fall off. Construction workers do not to have to be in tunnels to risk death; they fall off buildings because contractors don’t give them safety equipment. Workers die in fires that had to occur at some point because of the circumstances. Road accidents in India can hardly be called accidents as they are the most logical outcome of Indian traffic. We are that place where everything leads to a mishap, but there would always be that guy who brings cold soda from somewhere for the victim.

Road accidents are the dark leveller in India. A billionaire died recently; actors and politicians have perished in them. Every time a famous person’s death occurs, a minister suggests stern seat-belt regulation, which only increases the income of traffic cops. It is baffling that in India’s slow turn towards authoritarianism, the one place where freedom must be restricted continues to be a paradise of feral liberation—the road.

Yet, when the covid pandemic broke out, India fought valiantly. It was as though the country had decreed that you can die on the roads, in trains, by trains, and in fires, and even by eating a meal at a wedding celebration, but you will not die of covid. India, it seems, is okay with some kinds of death; deaths that occur when no one is looking or counting.





A censor board for OTT platforms? Think again.


2023-12-10

In its obsession with treating Indians as children, India keeps coming up with strange things. The latest is inside a policy draft released by the ministry of information and broadcasting to seek public opinion. It wishes to regulate streaming platforms like Netflix and cable networks by forcing them to appoint “Content Evaluation Committees” that will “certify” series and films on these platforms, a bit like how the Censor Board approves films meant for theatrical release. These panels will have “eminent individuals” as members, “representing different social groups, including but not limited to women, child welfare, Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, minorities etc…”

This is a part of the government’s ongoing effort to regulate entertainment. In 2021, it proposed a provision by which a film that has already been certified by the censor board can be reviewed if a person in the audience is offended. In a nation where it is a norm for people to wait years for justice, this policy attempted to provide express relief to those claiming to be offended, a group that can include charlatans and extortionists. The dim idea was canned. I don’t know why; its dimness is an unlikely reason. We always lament the bad things that happen in India, but we should take time out to marvel at the mystery of why some good things happen.

There have been other good developments. In 2021, through a list of guidelines, the government accepted that there is nudity in art, that it is okay, and that a 16-year-old’s life will not be ruined by the sight of a naked body. The guidelines prescribed age-ratings and attempted to create a system where thin-skinned Indians offended by content must first approach the grievance committee of the platform instead of taking the more entertaining route of police stations and courts. Still, nothing stops people from filing criminal charges against a platform or filmmakers, but at least the government thought of an alternative.

All major streaming platforms, including Jio, have objected to the current effort to create censor boards for over-the-top (OTT) content, and to other provisions in the policy draft. A person who was in the same room when a major streaming platform and the government spoke told me that platforms feel suffocated by this government’s loud and frequent contemplation of how it wishes to control what is viewed. Apart from censorship, what worries them is that three ministries are trying to regulate them: the ministry of electronics and IT; the ministry of information and broadcasting; and the ministry for communications.

The regression of India into a culturally sensitive society has already affected the viewing experience of Indians. HBO Max, famed for its quality content, had planned to enter India and produce local stories, but the platform eventually dropped the plan. I am told by people in the know that a part of the network’s reason was the fear that Indians are too spoiled for choice and stingy to pay the right price for great fare. But another major concern was the risk of censorship. Much of HBO’s content requires not only a mature audience, but also mature governance.

What does the government want? It wishes to control what people watch. We can pretend to be aghast, but I think it is somewhat natural for an Indian government to do that. India seeks to exert two kinds of control. Political and cultural. Political control can be exerted by trying to rein in or influence the news media. Resistance might be valiant and noble, but the Indian state probably holds most of the winning cards. India’s cultural control, though, is a bit easier to resist. Why is this distinction important?

India’s recent policies have clubbed news media and entertainment channels as a monolith just because they qualify as online streaming platforms. Maybe what the government is concerned about are activists who tend to call themselves “independent media.” To avoid looking like China, which restricts journalism, India tends to club the news and entertainment media together. So, among the first things that streaming platforms should achieve is to get India to make a clear distinction between facts and fiction, between journalism and a TV series. This is important because measures that are aimed at news activism should not suffocate entertainment in collateral damage. India does want to control culture, and it also wants to empower those who are offended, but in my view not as dearly as controlling news and activism.

What would I do if I were in the government and my pragmatic goal was to control what is useful to me but let Indians prosper otherwise? I would not suffocate entertainment. Already, in the world outside our screens, in the real world, India is a boring place, a republic against fun. For a country of this size, very few people visit it. Maybe the government should get out of at least one form of entertainment.

The best way to control an industry is by letting its executives and artists thrive. The more people have to lose, the more careful they would be about not losing it all. People are usually slaves to their prospects.

For entertainment to thrive, it needs to be free. When entertainment is constricted, the sector gets filled with conformists and sidekicks and those who specialize in safe bets. Already, streaming platforms all look alike. As a result they fight on price, and Indians pay among the lowest fees for streaming content. The fare on offer is not going to be improved by a censor board of “eminent” people.





The strange insignificance of the Parliament breach


2023-12-17

I am trying to understand why I am unable to accord any importance to the incident in Parliament on 13 December. In theory, two people jumping off the visitor’s gallery into the chamber while the House is in session and releasing a yellow gas should be a serious event, but I am unable to take it seriously. Nor do you, I suspect. It is not only the sort of people who read this newspaper who might be unaffected, but from what I gather, most Indians. The intruders said they were protesting their unemployment and I believe that is all there is to it. The incident, of course, is “a serious breach in security,” but nothing else about it is serious. One newspaper report said that the incident “shocked” the nation and I am baffled by the word. The nation was far from “shocked.” Not because it is a common occurrence, which it is not. But because it was oddly insignificant. In fact, as the news media keeps referring to one man as “the mastermind” of the incident, all I can think of is that ‘mastermind’ is an excessive word to describe the ring leader of some unemployed activists.

For most of India, a reason why the incident did not have any gravity is that none of the people involved had a Muslim name. If the intruders were Muslim, the nation would have gone crazy for a few days. In any case, in the new India, no sane Muslim is likely to protest unemployment in that manner. Had it happened, at least one TV channel would have explained how he was trained by Lashkar-e-something in Pakistan.

Without that connection, the incident was just a lame “andolanjeevi” protest. There was something European in the lameness—on par with sanctimonious activists defacing art or throwing desserts at powerful men. In Europe, unarmed people raiding a parliament would be a low-stakes stunt, but in India, it is self-destructive. The circle of activists who were involved face a harsh future. They appear the sort who wish to do well in their lives. So that lends a bit of sorrow to their plight. Ironically, their only chance at surviving lndia from now on might be through professional politics.

Another reason why the incident did not have any gravitas is that, in my view, no one likes politicians very much. Even people who vote for politicians do not generally like them. So a security scare for politicians does not move people the way other things can. Just imagine what would have happened if two intruders had broken into a school and released a harmless yellow gas as a sign of protest against the educational system. More hell would have broken lose than if the Parliament intruders had been Muslim. But a breach in security that could have actually been deadly for politicians if the intruders had violent intent does not enrage Indians, from what I can tell. Politicians are only popular within the context of politics. They are not like other famous people who are so loved that people have an interest in their safety.

Actually, the intruders probably connect with the average Indian in ways that Members of Parliament don’t. In looks, age and whining, the intruders seemed more representative than ageing men in Nehru jackets that are not called Nehru jackets anymore. Some of those elders were seen thrashing one of the intruders. In that moment, they looked like village headmen, which is what most politicians are, some literarily and others metaphorically. A video clip of Indian lawmakers beating up an intruder was the first sign to me that this was not a serious event. If there were any hint of real danger, my bet is that they would have fled.

The intruder who was so beaten seemed more innocuous than the men who were beating him. Also, the circle of activists who planned this silly stunt had meant no bodily harm to anyone. To convey this, they had held their gas canisters in their hands instead of flinging them.

The activists have explained why they protested in this manner, and their story is persuasive. They wanted to draw attention to the fact that India is shining for only some people. They wanted to express their disenchantment by raiding the place where lawmakers sit. They knew the Prime Minister was not going to be present, and they planned to project his absence as a metaphor for his absence from their lives. They wanted to perform the stunt a day earlier, in their telling, but did not get permission to enter. So even the fact that the date of the incident coincided with the anniversary of the deadly terror attack on Parliament in 2001 was a coincidence. They may not have known the significance of 13 December.

“The mastermind,” before he had surrendered, released an image of himself with a portrait of Bhagat Singh, who had attacked colonial rulers with something more potent than a yellow gas. Bhagat Singh has somehow become a mascot for those who want to convey that they are only attacking the government and not India.

Hours after the incident, a TV journalist held a canister in his hand and claimed it was the source of the yellow gas. Other TV journalists tried to get hold of the “evidence” and he ran about to evade them. He had a slight smile on his face. It can be said that on most days, it is terrible what TV journalists have to do to pay off their home loans, but their behaviour is also a good indicator of how serious a piece of news really is because they stand at ground zero and most of them are lousy actors. If they are amused by what’s going on, then the news is amusing, no matter what their mouths say when the cameras roll.





Why upper-caste Hindus of Kerala became Christians


2023-12-25

Now and then, when this column irritates a type of patriots, they call me “rice bag” on X.com. By this, they imply that I had converted to Christianity in exchange for a bag of rice offered by a missionary. I am offended by this high-carb insult; I would rather be accused of renouncing my religion for a bag of avocados, or even asparagus. The insult is also oddly funny, and it would have been especially hilarious to my grandparents. Many of the people who called me “rice bag” or their ancestors would not have been allowed to enter the homes of my grandparents, at least through the front door. My people, though some of them were poor landowners, considered themselves high caste and looked down upon not only other Christians, but also most Hindus.

Unlike in most Indian states, the Christians of Kerala are a part of the social and economic elite. Many consider themselves ‘upper castes’ even though a section of them believe their ancestors were the early Christians who came from the Middle East and settled in Kerala around 2 CE. But some Kerala Christians are specific about their lineage—they say they were Brahmins who had converted. There are ‘Brahmin Christians’ in Goa and Mangalore too. In case you did not guess it, they love the idea that they were Brahmins once. I don’t find this very interesting. What is fascinating though is this question: Why would high-caste Indians in olden days renounce their exquisite privileges for Christianity?

Recently, a bishop in Kerala had had it with Christians who claimed Brahmin heritage. He lamented that they hosted feasts to rejoice their lineage and invited him, too. He said their claim is bogus; Kerala’s Christians were not Brahmin converts.

Some historians who have sympathy for the bishop’s assertion have contended that the fact there were Christians in Kerala by 2 CE meant that they predated Brahmins as we know them today because they were yet to rise to the very top of the caste structure. (The hierarchy of the top three castes constantly shifted in ancient India until the priestly class somehow won.) However, there is some evidence that some people from Kerala identified as Brahmins back then and that they were in fact Christian. There are old historical accounts that mention this. And there is Brahminical behaviour, too, which is even more persuasive. In The Ivory Throne, Manu S. Pillai writes that a few centuries ago in Kerala, “…there were temples where only oil ‘purified’ by the touch of a Malayali Christian could be used to light lamps and holy fires.” This appears to be a continuation of a Brahmin privilege, which was unaffected by their fling with Christianity. Also, in ancient and medieval Kerala, as bad a place for the ‘low-born’ as the rest of India, where Brahmins considered it tragic even to have seen ‘low-castes,’ there were joint processions of Hindu deities and an image of Saint Thomas. That was not a sign of secularism, but of cosmopolitan cooperation among high-castes. Some of this Brahminical behaviour among Christians percolated down to modern times. Sujatha Gidla, in her memoir about growing up as a Dalit, mentions that a Malayalee Christian girl who had an affair with her uncle used to smuggle the man into her house, but only from the back-door because he was “an untouchable.” So there are indicators that Brahmins and other high-castes converted to Christianity, but there is no historical certainty around why the biggest beneficiaries of Hinduism renounced their faith.

There are some feeble explanations. That a Semitic or European evangelist came to Kerala and talked Brahmins out of their religion that gave them a life-long exclusive club membership. That is not convincing. I also wonder what language was used. Another explanation is that as the Europeans grew influential in India, their Christian evangelism too grew more persuasive. But this does not explain why there were Brahmin Christians long before the first Europeans landed in Kerala, towards the end of the 15th century. The Christians of Kerala probably predated even the advent of Christianity in Europe. In fact, when the Portuguese landed in Kerala, they found Christians among the local elite who had not heard of the Pope or Vatican. Across the centuries, something was making some Brahmins become Christian and they did not have the same emotional or economic logic as low-caste Hindus who converted.

My theory is that the Brahmins did not ‘convert’ to Christianity. ‘Conversion’ is a new term. They merely adopted Christianity as it was new and exotic. Just like how Tom Cruise, born Christian, ‘became’ a scientologist. Hinduism was so deeply ingrained that the adoption of Christianity, even if it came with a sprinkling of water, did not alter much. Certainly it did not alter the caste of the elite. Also, globally, polytheism preceded monotheism. The many gods of Hinduism point to an ancient polytheist society. Once upon a time, it was no big deal for people to have more than one faith.

In Gem in the Lotus, Abraham Eraly notes that the early success of Buddhism and Jainism in India were because their founders were upper-caste Hindu elites, and so too their disciples, who did not think they were renouncing their faith; certainly not their castes. Once in India, people were rigid about caste and broad-minded about religion. ‘Conversions’ happened in time, with new generations, in later eras when people began to take religion seriously, and everyone had to choose what they were.





Aim for clarity: In defence of a work-life imbalance


2023-12-29

The global mind industry’s most popular spurious advice is that we must maintain a ‘work-life balance.’ This view is popular because it has the word ‘balance’ in it. People tend to believe that anything that seeks balance must be wise, healthy and correct. But from what I have seen, the best way to live is to have a singular preoccupation and bet most of one’s life on pursuing it.

There is a perception that people who spend a great deal of their time on their calling or material ambitions eventually pay a price. They triumph at ‘work’ but lose in ‘life.’ This moral is so ingrained in us that even as a child, I could deduce its meaning from improbable signs. For instance, when a Malayalam film showed a woman in sleeveless blouse, I instantly knew she was most likely a ‘career woman’ who also had sleeping pills because she was unhappy. That was far from the truth even then, but we didn’t know that.

The fact is that people who dedicate a lot of time to material or artistic pursuits are doing just fine. And those who spend all their time on ‘family life,’ too, are fine, especially if they do not try to elevate some pastime into a profession. In fact, the most confused people are those who divide their time equally in a Solomonic way between ‘work’ and ‘life,’ trying to attain an illusory balance and enjoying neither.

Generally, balance is an ideal that is not meant to be achieved. Rather, it is to be used as a guiding moral that can pull you away from excess. That is why people like the word ‘balance.’ It makes a lot of sense in many aspects of life, like exercise and food. And that is how the world has been trained to think of the ‘work-life balance.’ But it is bad advice. We must instead strive for a work-life imbalance. We must focus intensely on what we want or what we are good at, and merely survive in the other important aspects of life. People who have a calling must work long hours without feeling like delinquents as long as they are not foolish enough to ruin their health; and, people who do not have ambitions should stop simulating ambition and wasting too much time on the misery of work.

I do not say that we must pursue only what is most important to us. Actually, there is no hierarchy within our work, love and family lives, or any other aspect of life that I may have missed. Working alone won’t do; nesting alone won’t do. All I say is balance is nonsense. Imbalance alone can take us where we want to go.

There are some public figures who appear to have a ‘work-life balance.’ But I think they are simply married to people who support or tolerate their imbalance, which is a very special form of luck for those who know what they want to do with their lives.

I know people who are not so lucky. I know writers who lost their marriages because they would walk around their homes for months in the trance of the stories they were writing, unaware of their sulking spouse.

What do wellness savants mean, in the first place, by ‘work’ and ‘life.’ By ‘work’ they mean a material pursuit, and by ‘life’ they mean everything else like love, family or marriage. It is the same sort of savants who say stuff like, “Marriage is hard work.” Any substantive relationship, to them, is “hard work.” People are hard work. So, in a way, what they are goading people to achieve is a balance between ‘work’ and ‘hard work.’

I am not being facetious here. I fully accept that one way or another, most of life is work; it becomes work. Anything that requires more than four hours of your day is work, especially people. I only say that to be very good at one thing, we need to be mediocre in other things. To strive for balance is an invitation to be mediocre in everything.

A few weeks ago, Indian billionaire N.R. Narayana Murthy said that India’s young should work “70 hours” a week to make India a better place. I am assuming he meant a five-day-week. People erupted in disdain. I did wonder what the fuss was all about because when you are in the throes of a professional passion, ten hours a day is hardly ‘work.’ But he was referring to the average youth, the clerk who works because he needs a salary. This is the constituency that is the most receptive to calls for a ‘work-life balance.’ They have no calling, no pursuit, only a need for income. They probably hate their jobs. To them, everything that is not work is ‘life.’ Why wouldn’t they seek a ‘balance’? In advanced economies, people like them are choosing a ‘balance’ that may not be a balance at all.

A few years ago, Ratan Tata lamented the work culture in Britain: “I feel if you have come from Bombay to have a meeting and the meeting goes till 6pm, I would expect that you won’t at 5 o’clock say, ‘Sorry, I have my train to catch. I have to go home.’ Friday from 3.30pm you can’t find anybody in their office (in London).”

This is how things look when the ‘work-life’ imbalance swings the other way, towards ‘life.’ That is where the West is headed: People with a calling spend all their time at work, and the others won’t “go the extra mile,” in the words of Tata. They have, he observed, “a work ethics issue.”





Why disgrace is unlikely to erode the allure of Harvard


2024-01-08

A few days ago, the president of Harvard University resigned in disgrace. There is a perception among cultural observers in America that the episode has eroded Harvard’s prestige. That cannot be true. Disgrace does not diminish an exclusive club. That is not how prestige works. What ends prestige is, in fact, equality.

After Hamas slaughtered over a thousand Israelis in a single day, wounded over 3,400, and raped an unknowable number, there was widespread denouncement across US universities. Not of Hamas, but of Israel. In political turmoil, university students tend to back the poorer player when their own stakes in the region are very low. But their timing was atrocious. Their protests against Israel began just hours after the massacre. There was another factor at play. Humanitarians have invented sustainable ways to disguise hatred. On American campuses, a dislike for Jews, who have an outsized political influence, can masquerade as love for Palestinians. All this was in full flow in the Ivy League, including Harvard University, whose president Claudine Gay failed to stop extreme posturing against Israel. Influential Jews responded by hitting where it hurts most—donations. They also levelled charges of “anti-Semitism” against some varsities. In a Congressional hearing, when Gay was asked whether calls for genocide against Jews on Harvard’s campus violated its rules on bullying and harassment, she said it depends on “the context.” As the face of Harvard, her testimony was a disaster. But she somehow kept her job. Oddly, what brought her stint to an end was the less grave charge that many years ago, in her scholarly works, she had lifted whole paragraphs from the works of other people.

Not just Gay, Harvard too has emerged poorly from the turmoil. But that does not affect its allure for most of the social and economic elite of America and the rest of the world. The weak moral intellect of an exclusive club is not something that repels most aspiring members of the club.

The myth of the Ivy League is that these colleges seek only exceptional students. The world has seen many duds from these universities. Even so, the nature of the world is to give an exclusive club a long rope. Even most people who denounce the Ivy League have some complicated respect for them. There are some whose disdain is honest, who truly do not want to join overrated clubs, but they are very few.

In 2019, news broke that some parents had paid millions of dollars in bribes to secure Ivy League admissions for their wards. Even this did not diminish the lure of these big brands. In fact, the scandal put a financial price on the abstract idea of being a legitimate Ivy League student.

There was a time when the best colleges in the world attracted the best students. In the West, it was a long time ago, in the golden age of the elites when only they had access to quality in any walk of life. Their haunts do not hold the same promise now. But all prestige needs is social exclusivity in the guise of intellectual exclusivity. People grant this halo to a handful of institutes, despite recurring evidence that a typical individual who passes out of these clubs is ordinary or worse, or successful only by the dint of being born in the right home that equips him with exceptional social contacts.

Everything that seems unfair about the luck of the average person who walks into an Ivy League is what makes it alluring. To give an impression of fairness, the Ivy League simulates equality by seeking something that sounds like equality but is not— ‘diversity.’ This is generally an expanded colour palette of cream. With some exceptions, it is the privileged among African-Americans, Hispanics, Indians and Chinese who have the best shot at an Ivy League. Diversity in a system only expands the cultural diversity of its snobs.

If disgrace and mediocrity cannot affect the lure of a prestigious club, what ends prestige? Prestige is not eternal. The moment an exclusive club is breached by an alarming number of the poor and lower middle class, the elite stop applying, and then a college is suddenly not prestigious anymore. This is what happened to many elite Indian colleges. They followed a socially just system for admissions—an entrance exam. That is not how Harvard screens. It has opaque processes. But in India, rising economic democracy, especially for necessities like food and schooling, created a surge of poor and lower-middle-class applicants for engineering, medicine and civil services. Upper-class students could not compete anymore. Once, IITs had among the finest quizzers, writers and music bands. Now people have filled those places who did not have the luxury of pursuing things that have no point. So the IITs have lost their allure among upper classes, who find it easier to enter colleges in the West.

Why is it that when social equality helps the less fortunate gain access to a prestigious club, it ceases to be prestigious? Because prestige is not about that hollow thing called ‘merit’; it is always about the fellowship of an aristocracy.

This principle is at play not only in economics. Take, for instance, the scaling of Mount Everest. Its prestige has been diminished by economic democracy that has made the feat possible for numerous ordinary people, including the disabled.

So what can ruin Harvard is not some disgrace here and there or the mediocrity of its alumni. Harvard will be ruined when its admission process becomes socially just.





Life isn’t about adjusting to one’s external environment


2024-01-15

Like you, I have been trained to believe that adaptation to environment is life. Something about the word ‘adaptation’ gives us the sense that it is the smart thing for an organism to do. And who can have a quarrel with ‘the environment’, the lovely blue and green brine in which we pickle, which leaks into us now and then and alters us to be better? So, when I read a paragraph that rubbished this view in an off-hand way, I was startled in the way other people’s insight could affect me in my teens.

The paragraph is in A Promised Land: The Triumph and Tragedy of Israel by Ari Shavit, who uses it to explain why Israel resisted its Arab brine. He writes: “The mid-nineteenth-century French physiologist Claude Bernard was the first to overturn the conventional understanding that life is an adjustment to the environment. Adjustment to the surrounding environment is death, argued Bernard; the phenomenon of life is that of preserving an internal environment contrary to an outside environment.”

This is a persuasive interpretation of Bernard’s observation: “The constancy of the interior environment is the condition of free and independent life.” This phenomenon later came to be called ‘homeostasis.’ His insight was that life is resistance to the external environment. A minutely perfected internal clockwork protects the body from the environment, which is actually very harsh.

If air on Earth, which is mostly nitrogen, breaks through the body’s protections, it will kill us. Pure oxygen, too, can kill us. An ambient temperature of 22° Celsius is pleasant, but the same thing inside our body will be the end of us. Life emerged on Earth, or perhaps it was seeded from another world but it bloomed here. Nevertheless, Earth is a lethal planet for all life, only somewhat more benign than other planets. Life survives in a vessel that does not ‘adjust’ to the environment, but defies it. This portents our colonization of other worlds. We have always lived on a toxic planet inside a self-regulatory suit.

You know that I am saying all this to drive home something else, but let me dwell on the analogy a bit longer.

The writer and physician Siddhartha Mukherjee, in an article in the New Yorker, explained how precarious the internal settings of the human body are. “Consider temperature: the normal human body maintains an extraordinarily narrow range—somewhere between ninety-seven and ninety-nine degrees (Fahrenheit)—despite enormous, often unpredictable variations in the environment. The level of sodium in your blood is tightly regulated between 135 and 145 milliequivalents per liter—a number controlled by exquisite sensors in the brain coupled with an equally accurate mechanism that retains or dispenses salt and water in the kidneys.”

This view of the human body reminds me of the definition of art by E.M. Forster that I have heard my mother chant all through my childhood—that art is something that possesses “internal harmony in the bosom of this disordered planet.” (I realize now that she always omitted ‘bosom,’ probably because the word was X-rated at home.) Art as resistance to its external environment is an explanation of pure art without sanctimony. Finally, a definition of art makes sense to me. And I can see why pure art is fated to be niche. Art that ‘adjusts’ to its circumstances is a kind of death. It transforms into something else—still enjoyable perhaps, but not art.

I am fascinated not by the internal harmony part—of art, or the human body, or everything that homeostasis now reminds me of.

That beautiful systems have internal harmony was never a surprise. I am fascinated by the disordered brine. And that a system is a system because it is not an extension of the universe, rather it has been designed in resistance to it.

The survival of Israel, too, was cultural homeostasis. Shavit writes that in the 1930s and 40s, Zionism came to the conclusion that its “surrounding environment is extremely cruel… Under these conditions, adjustment is death. The only way to maintain life is resistance.” And Israel came to be the “lonely desert fortress casting the shadow of awe on an arid land.”

Homeostasis also explains the meaning of an institution in a true democracy, why something is an institution only if it is independent. And why the US has institutions and India lacks them. American institutions have survived politics and a president who did not believe in them. They were built in resistance to their political environment. Indian institutions are too new to be sophisticated enough to maintain their own internal harmony. They have ‘adjusted’ to their environment, to a new India.

The same phenomenon also explains why movements that become too practical are doomed. Practicality is ‘adjustment’ to the environment. For instance, ‘agreeable’ feminists, who do not make men uncomfortable, are never as effective as those who have an ascetic focus on their agenda to resist a world created for men.

It may appear that ‘adjustment’ to circumstances can prolong a movement or a human entity. But that is a misunderstanding of evolution. We have two fallacies about evolution. One is that it is a progression. But in reality, evolution is merely change. The second fallacy is that evolution is an opportunistic transformation of life. What homeostasis tells us is that evolution is the death of a species. Something ends for something else to begin. You may say that is life; but it is actually the definition of death.





What next after the temple ceremony in Ayodhya


2024-01-22

All around me, there has been a spectacle of euphoria at most. In my colony, a security guard was deployed to distribute scented candles with the brand-name “Ram”. I do not know why scented candles exist as an object in the first place, but I accepted it.

Of course, some people are exhilarated, and ‘some people’ in India could be millions. My cab driver arrived wearing a saffron cap with images of Lord Ram on it, playing a holy song. I asked him to turn the music off, as I do every time I get into a car. Only after I said it, did I think there could be trouble. He gave me a look, but switched it off. Then he rechecked my name on the app and looked at me again in the rear-view mirror. But we quickly became friends, and I even conducted taxi-driver journalism on him. He did not change my view that at a mass level, there is very little real euphoria. I have not been able to convince anyone about this view, but even Hindus who dispute me are not euphoric themselves. They say others must certainly be filled with passion for the event, but they personally do not know anyone who is moved by Ayodhya today the way Hindus were in the 1990s.

As I write this piece, I feel I am in a time that is similar to times when religions were born, or at least when legendary temples and mosques were dreamt into life. This was perhaps how the Konark Temple was consecrated—an emperor willed it, and on the day of the consecration, the whole kingdom had to know, even though only VIPs were invited to the holy site, and surely all schools were shut. After Mir Baqi built the Babri Masjid in Ayodhya, the whole town must have came to a standstill for its inauguration. And I wonder if the political act of creating a temple or mosque failed to stir mass religious fervour in olden days too.

A few days ago, a friend told me that it is in the nature of belief that spectacular places of worship, like the Blue Mosque in Istanbul, or Notre Dame in Paris, do not have the same religious gravitas as pilgrimage sites, which are usually small, austere and serious places of worship. This is true, but I feel there is a more immediate reason why there is so little mass religious zeal around the temple. The coolness is a sign that devout Hindus know they have finally won India back in a crucial way; a cultural war that raged for centuries is over. Even though a sense of Hindu victimhood survives as a convenient emotion, I feel that in sober moments few doubt that Hindus are more equal in India. If the crowning glory of the victory, in Ayodhya, has been met with equanimity, it is because victors wear victory easy.

Now that the Hindu side won, what is the meaning of it all? What’s next for India?

In one possible scenario, I hope we can be a little like the UAE, where clarity over a religious identity, Islamic in this Gulf country’s case, underpins a vague secular modernity on the surface that is required to attract Western investments. In that way, the ‘secularism’ of, say, Dubai is functionally effective. It exists, and within its narrow boundaries, it is even consistent.

There is an argument that India cannot have Dubai’s diluted ‘secularism’ because our religious diversity differs significantly in its make-up from the UAE’s. Unlike the floating minority groups of the Emirates, Muslims are a sizeable proportion of India’s population, which is reckoned to be above 1.4 billion people now. This tends to complicate the country’s Hindu-Muslim dynamics of popular representation in the context of polarized politics.

As things stand, Muslims appear to have replaced Dalits as India’s actual underclass. Dalits, even in the eras they fared worst, could escape their caste by leaving their village lives to seek cultural anonymity in Indian cities. Muslims in India do not appear to have the same escape path from their social identity, since name recognition plays a role in how they are identified.

For centuries, Hinduism was the indisputable background hum of the country, and caste was the individual’s effective social identity. Before the Muslim invasions and Mughal phase of history, as records indicate, Hinduism was so fundamental to India that elite Hindus freely experimented with Christianity, Buddhism, Jainism and scores of faiths and cults that have vanished, without the fear of losing their Hinduness. What never changed for most, however, was their caste. Today, strife related to caste is likely to continue despite a spectacular resurgence of Hindu belief.

This dominance will also not alter the fact that cultural free speech has been vanishing in mainstream India. Society, by and large, is very different from what it was ten years ago. Then Indians enjoyed some kinds of free speech not because of any dedication to ideals, but because of Indian inefficiencies. In the melee of Indian life, some freedoms percolated down to people. Now cultural governance appears to be very organized.

I wish road design and lane discipline were included in the cultural shift that is underway. But all the things that save lives and improve the quality of modern life in India do not fall under the ambit of religion or politics.





Vexed: The future of friendships in the age of opinions


2024-01-28

She was in Ayodhya last week. The fervour of the new temple there has not consumed her, but she saw on social media some of her friends, with whom she may have shared broccoli and other liberal greens, posting their joy. It is a type of joy that inevitably has the quality of glee, and she has begun to wonder what it is that she loves about those friends, and whether she can still love them now that she knows there is something of the mainstream in them. She wonders how to stay true to friends when you cannot argue with them about their deepest beliefs. Thus she enters a confusion of our times.

People are losing friends they have loved for decades. They are losing them over opinions. There was a time, not long ago, when very few people had any ideology. In fact, only elderly men had ideology, and there was a term for them. It was not ‘uncles.’ It was ‘ideologues.’ Nobody uses that word anymore because now we know that to be an ideologue is in the nature of our whole species. And it appears no one can hide their ideology anymore. As a result, across the nation, especially in the educated middle-class, people have been losing friends.

Once we disliked people only for what they did to us; now people dislike those who are close to them for how they think. When I tell Nidhi this, she says, “Maybe you will now roll your eyes, but I think as a woman. We, or at least I, always need to know what the person I’m speaking to is thinking. And not just doing. I don’t know how to separate the two.”

That people could give up friends merely for their views was unusual until recently. I did lose some friends, in my twenties, over my opinion that Rahul Dravid was a mascot for people who had no panache in their own professions. But you can see how this view, sadly for me, was inescapably a personal comment on my friends. But such a loss was rare. Until about a decade ago.

Then things changed fast. Everybody could behave like a writer, and that threw cosmopolitan friendships into turmoil. You may feel things have subsided, but that is because everyone who had to lose friends already has. But then, a new generation has risen, happy gangs of dissimilar friends, who are yet to seriously read a newspaper but have begun to discover politics, and their bonds are probably doomed.

Everyone is affected by this, yet it is not a universal behaviour. People who consider themselves ‘liberal’ are more likely to break old friendships with those they consider “too right-wing,” “too religious,” “too conservative, “too nationalistic” and other European things.

The subject of their ire, the ‘right-wing’ people, for all their fulminations, seldom end a friendship just because someone believes in climate change, transgender rights or even secularism. They may detest intellectuals who stand for all this, but not if they are friends. On occasion, when they mock a whole group of people, they immediately say that famous thing: “Don’t get me wrong, some of my best friends are….” It does sound vacuous, yet they might be speaking the truth when they say that they may mock groups of people but they love their friends among them.

There is some consolation in this. A surprise of our times is that much of the knowable world has turned out to be ‘right-wing.’ Many conscientious women discovered their sweet fathers to be colony patriarchs. Oh, the things they began to say. Who knew affectionate fathers could say such things. Then it turned out that their mothers were no slouches themselves. And then young urban men, too, whose refinement did not save them from the fear of becoming cultural orphans.

“For a long time, I thought I had never been in love with right-wing men,” Nidhi says. “But that’s actually not true. Everyone, or rather most men, have a shade of it within them.” In her view, “Right-wing men… understand women in a very particular way. And that way has obviously seeped into this country’s everyday-ness. So I’ve found shades of it in my lovers as well. Maybe there’s shades of it in me as well, who knows? It has become increasingly difficult to say that I’ve not been with right-wing men.”

“Also,” she says, “a strange thing I’ve realized is that while reporting I’ve found myself feeling physically safer around right-wing men than our left men. Mostly because they (those with a moral compass) are strange creatures, preaching feminism to me, telling me what I should know about the world.”

One of the great cons of our age has to be men pretending to have the same politics as women. The bond between men and women was the first foreboding that friendships are doomed by opinions. Spouses accuse each other in very personal ways, but often they are only reacting to fundamental differences in how most men and women think.

What a marriage should teach us but we never remember is that people are better than the things they say; people are better than their opinions. A friend is better than his mere ideology. People who like us have got something right about the world. How does it matter what has suddenly got into them. Half of ideology is anyway morning cortisol.





Fintech question: Why is the credit card still around?


2024-02-04

My latest credit card bill is less than ₹2,000. Even at the height of covid, my spend was never this low. I have not become poor. I have been reducing my credit card purchases ever since I discovered Paytm, which was so smooth and efficient that it felt as though finance had liberated itself from government clerks. (How wrong I was, but that later.)

Like most people, I started with small purchases and with the launch of the Unified Payments Interface (UPI), I started using the app for big online transactions. In recent times, I have used my credit card only when I was left with no practical choice, like when I was booking a hotel outside India, for which I would be fleeced 3.5% of the transaction amount and an unfair currency exchange rate. If it were not for global financial bureaucracy, I have no need for a credit card at all. I never needed the ‘credit’ part of the card. Most people don’t. And I wonder everyday why e-wallets and the UPI have not already killed credit cards. But the fact is that credit card customers and card usage continue to rise in India, and it is Paytm’s payments bank that has been dealt a grave blow by the gatekeepers of Indian finance.

In any case, as far as I am concerned, credit cards are dead. There is a newspaper in my head that is entirely dedicated to the events in my life. On its front page is the headline: ‘Credit Cards: End of an Era.’

I first saw a credit card when I was 19, when Citibank somehow gave it to a close relative who should have been the last person to hold such a card. On the day of the card’s activation, he took his wife and daughter to the market and bought utensils and innerwear. They marvelled at procuring goods without the feeling of having spent any money. The man defaulted on the very first bill and has since evaded all kinds of people whom the bank sent to collect the money. But, in that house, even today, “Citibank” is a discreet code for underwear.

I would be 28 when I would get my own card, but I would almost never use it because I was then suspicious of everything I did not need but was given to me. But eventually I accepted its convenience. Sometimes when I would forget to pay the bill, I would be charged a huge interest, which was more than what villainous moneylenders in art cinema charged. Money-lenders across the world lived in social guilt and the suspicion that all bad things that happened to them were because of curses of the indebted; but not credit card executives. The credit card, of course, was once a marvel of technology. But not anymore. Without the marvel, it is just a temptation offered by a sly money-lender.

I particularly dislike credit cards because two layers of banking middlemen take protection money on every international transaction just for having a monopoly over the gateways. They make me see the point of cryptos; and also why governments and banks would have never let them survive. I have stopped using my credit card domestically in vengeance against the companies that made 3.5% of every foreign transaction. Sometimes, it was 7%—like when a hotel used my card to block a deposit, and later when it released the money back to me, the banking system charged me 3.5% on each transaction along with a comical interpretation of exchange rates. So I deny them revenue on my home turf where I suddenly have options. I don’t think my transactions at home are entirely free, because the merchant at the point of sale does pay a fee and it is all passed on to me. Yes, for using the card my bank does give me “reward points,” which I can encash for many useless goods and some useful coupons, but the “rewards” only remind me that I am paying extra for it all in some form when I use the card. I agree that “zero-interest” equated monthly instalments (EMIs) are helpful for those who wish to buy an expensive good they may or may not need, and that a zero-interest EMI is truly zero. Even so, such schemes are funded by merchants to attract customers, which means one way or another I pay a price for the “zero-interest-EMI,” even though I have no need for it.

In my toxic relationship with the credit card, a decisive moment came in December last year. I was in a restaurant and did not have my phone, so I had to use my card. Maybe someone saw the number on it and passed it on. That evening a person used my card to make online purchases worth more than £5,000. My bank eventually resolved the issue and I got all my money back, but I was done with the credit card.

As I feel armed with good modern options, I feel sorry for Paytm, which was how many of us discovered ‘fintech.’ Paytm had seeded a bank that the Reserve Bank of India has crippled for “non-compliance.” It will affect millions of users; not in a serious financial way, but in a behavioural way because they are habituated to Paytm’s interface. One would expect RBI to give clear reasons for the harsh blow. But the problem is not clearly defined. All we have are problems cited by unnamed sources. The venerated central bank has had problems with Paytm for some time over know-your-customer processes, fake compliance and for not setting up enough safeguards against sharing data with foreign companies.

There is a general feeling that RBI has a point, but I cannot help but feel that the country’s banking bureaucracy dislikes all that can replace conventional banking. It reminds me of how much of the telephony clergy despised the internet and then mobile phones when they first appeared.





The true meaning of ‘misanthrope’ can be found in a comedy series


2024-02-12

In Curb Your Enthusiasm, a series created by Larry David, he plays a melodramatic version of what he claims is his real self. Once, he encounters a large woman in a shelter for battered women and he suspects she is lying about her trauma because she is so physically imposing no man could have battered her. Another day, he appoints an African-American man to behave poorly with Caucasians, on his behalf. At the peak of the #MeToo movement in America, when Larry David finds a date, he persuades her to appear on tape with him giving him consent to get physical. Also, he woos a disabled woman to get ahead in queues and ends up cheating on her with another disabled woman.

The twelfth and final season of the cult sitcom dropped a few days ago. Long before that, Larry David has been celebrated for all that is great about him. Except one thing—he is not hailed enough for unintentionally introducing to the modern world the most sensible meaning of the word ‘misanthrope.’

There is a corrupt side to language, especially English, which has words that do not exist in most languages. Through labels, it simplifies complexity, and at times manufactures ideas that do no exist (just about anything that ends with ‘ism’). Among its odd words is ‘misanthrope,’ which dictionaries interpret as “hater of mankind.” It is not an obscure word at all. Yet, its dictionary meaning is obscure. “Hater of mankind.” Who hates humans, really? People do say that, but without seriousness. Larry David himself says that. Yet, he is a man who loves his friends, and even an ex-wife. No one truly knows the meaning of ‘hating humans.’ At best, it is a lament. Or there could be a form of mental illness that makes some people despise humans.

But ‘misanthrope’ always had a potential meaning that could describe more than six weird people, it could describe a human state. Its true meaning lay hidden for centuries as it was appropriated by misguided linguists who were confused by too much knowledge of Greek etymology.

The true meaning of ‘misanthrope’ was prophesied by a broad type of people. They did not hate humans; they had contempt or just amusement for what humans did. The contemptuous and the amused are two different types of misanthropes. Both can have astonishing clarity about humans because they find a way to observe their species from the outside, but only one of them is a natural storyteller. The contemptuous artist is a bore, but the amused observer of the herd is interesting to the whole herd.

Misanthropy, as a general frustration with society, is more mainstream than it appears at first glance. What else is the government’s family-planning policy but a form of misanthropy?

Environmentalism is mostly misanthropy. Also smart investing. You do make money going by the wisdom of crowds, but you make much more if you know when to bet against the herd. Also, a good diet is a misanthropic diet. If you don’t eat how most people do, it usually means you have intelligent eating habits. There is a reason why the best way to irritate relatives is to follow a healthy diet. It makes them feel that you are abandoning them as they sink into their slow deaths.

A person who is suspicious of the majority condition deserves a word that means more than a “hater of mankind,” who may not even exist. The misanthrope is not a psychopath (who too may not exist but that’s for another day). Everyday misanthropes can see clearly the absurdities of herd behaviour.

Across the ages, misanthropes were among the most influential people. The distant amused observer is a common trope in the arts. Comedians have used it for long. Jerry Seinfeld and Larry David tapped it for the comedy Seinfeld. The misanthrope is the soul of Fleabag, a comedy about reasonless grief. But the ‘misanthrope’ was never clearly marked and named until someone used it to promote Curb Your Enthusiasm. Larry David thus became not only the most famous ‘misanthrope’ in the world but also one who was most likely to actually exist. His mistrust of human beings makes him see through their facades. In one episode, Larry David discovers something only he could have—that a hip restaurant gives the best seats to attractive people and hides other people, like him, in the back.

Misanthropy is also a layer of morality. Once, in the series, Larry David hires a garish street sex worker so that he can use the car-pool lane that is unavailable to solo drivers. This is a truly egalitarian man, who only sees where he wishes to go and not a class hierarchy. He gets into a lot of trouble because of her, but treats her as an equal all through. Another time, he discovers a Palestinian restaurant that serves the best chicken he has ever eaten. This discovery is bad news for some adulterous Jews who have been bringing their lovers here, confident that they will never be seen by other Jews. Larry David invites a Jewish friend there who arrives in a yamaka (Jewish cap). As the man approaches, Larry David, who is Jewish himself, figures that he would be debarred from the diner if the Palestinians see him with such a conservative Jew. He has to choose between chicken and Jewish pride. It is a no-contest. He wrestles his friend outside the restaurant to remove his yamaka. Palestinians inside the restaurant watch, baffled, and Larry David becomes their hero. A true misanthrope upsets his own tribe more often than his historic foes.

So often in real life, the misanthrope is an accidental humanitarian, and people who call themselves ‘humanists’ are dangerous.





Is there a meaningful issue that could anger Indians?


2024-02-19

The bond, which was sold in various denominations by the State Bank of India (SBI), could be bought by an Indian citizen, corporation or other type of organization, and deposited in the account of a legitimate political party that secured at least 1% of the votes polled in the last general or a state election. It enabled the donor to pay any amount to a political party and remain anonymous. Anonymous to us, that is, the citizens.

The government defended the anonymity of the donor stating that we had no business knowing everything. It even defended the anonymity of the donor in court. Attorney General of India R. Ventakaramani said there “can be no general right to know anything and everything without being subjected to reasonable restrictions.”

Yet there was no public rage over electoral bonds. People did not hit the streets screaming how can they be kept in the dark about those donating crores to political parties, apparently out of unconditional love. They did not ask who the donors were and why were they donating, or what were they getting in return.

We can expect supporters of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) to be quiet, but a majority of Indians are not BJP voters. Yet, there was no real public ire.

It was not public sentiment that made the Supreme Court look into electoral bonds. The court was hearing a clutch of petitions filed by activists and the Congress, which received only a small fraction of what the BJP received from electoral bonds. As the BJP transmits an aura of permanence in Delhi and grows stronger in states, anonymous donations to the party would have grown many times, making it even more formidable at the polls. The Indian public did nothing to kill the bonds. If it were not for a few activists and a party fighting for its survival, all major parties would have continued to get crores from donors whose identity would never have been revealed.

It is difficult to make a wide section of Indians angry about useful things. Practically, when it comes to issues that affect their quality of life, there is no public rage in India. In its defence of electoral bonds, the government officially claimed that the donors were anonymous even to their beneficiaries, the political parties. As though it is very hard for a person who is sending an enormous sum to a political party ‘anonymously’ to intimate someone in the party that some money is coming its way.

The idea of the electoral bond was introduced by the late Arun Jaitley, a BJP leader and lawyer. He said that this device would eliminate black money from political donations and guard the identity of virtuous donors.

Anonymity, Jaitley had claimed, would protect the donor from political vendetta. So, in the national interest, the anonymity of donors had to be preserved. Last week, the Supreme Court dismissed this view.

The Supreme Court has directed the State Bank of India to reveal the identities of donors and the details of bond encashment by political parties. If this actually happens, patterns of quid pro quo may emerge that would be fascinating.

However, even if some startling patterns come to light, there will probably be no public outrage in the country. Just as there is no public rage against lethal bad air, traffic congestion, rampant petty corruption in government offices across the nation and the pathetic quality of life in all major Indian cities.

There are, of course, signs of localized public anger about very specific issues. As I write this column, farmers from Punjab are agitating in and around Delhi, seeking better prices for their crops from the government.

A few days ago, a few politicians from the South had made symbolic protests in Delhi against the Centre, accusing it of treating states that are not governed by the BJP poorly. But these do not constitute public rage by the standards of Indians who have in the past protested forcefully against caste-based reservations and on matters of religion. Somehow, issues like the probable misuse of electoral bonds and air quality have never stirred public emotion, at least not in a highly visible or audible way.

Even what is called the anti-corruption movement of 2010 was never really against corruption. It began as an anti-politician sentiment in 2008, after ten terrorists attacked Mumbai. And it slowly revealed itself as an anti-Congress nationalistic movement that expressed a farcical collective shock at the level of corruption in India, as though it was something new.

Public anger in India is fragmented, and when it does have national scale, it is usually over tired social issues.

It is possible that mass disenchantment in India is never obvious until the results of a general election are announced. That is one way a modern democracy expresses its anger. By voting. But then, in the past ten years, especially during national elections to the Lok Sabha, it appears that most of India has reached some kind of an emotional Zen-like equilibrium, as though the country has solved all its major problems.





Semaglutide and the wild democratization of thinness


2024-02-26

Across the world, a wonder drug is helping the rich lose weight without the inconvenience of putting in an effort. As a result, Semaglutide, a string of amino acids created by a Danish pharma giant to reduce blood sugar, is democratizing thinness. What was once possible only for people with resolve, lovers of fitness, austere eaters, the genetically lucky, the vain, and masochists, is now attainable by unremarkable people. In time, as patents expire across the world, the prices of the drug will crash and most people will be able to lose weight in the easiest way the world has yet invented. And we will move closer to a kind of equality that is not talked about often—better health for people who cannot work hard to achieve it, or people who are simply not lucky enough to be born with normal metabolism. Is this sort of equality a good thing? What can ever be bad about equality?

For centuries, democracy had a great reputation, until our times when the democratization of opinions began to accurately reflect human nature. Not everyone enjoys this revelation. But what can be wrong in a levelling of the health field? What happens when bad genes, gluttony and decadence can go unpunished? What is the consequence of simplification? Of something that used to be very difficult becoming easy?

Semaglutide was developed by the pharma major Novo Nordisk as a way to manage diabetes. The drug increases the production of insulin, which in turn reduces blood sugar. A collateral benefit is fat loss. Semaglutide, which is sold under various brand names, is a prescription drug. It is prescribed for obesity too, but widely used unofficially, without prescription, by those who may not be diabetic or obese, but want to look fit, or at least thinner.

There have been weight-loss drugs before, but Semaglutide actually works, according to general medical and user opinion. There are side effects, but so far nothing out of the ordinary when compared to other medicines. It is very expensive, as new superstar drugs tend to be. It is usually injected every week, or had orally everyday. In India, its injections can cost ₹80,000 per month and the pill can cost ₹10,000 per month. The drug is even more expensive in the West. Yet, there is such strong demand for it that Nova Nordisk is unable to meet it. An odd quality of our times is that the rich are our guinea pigs, and it is they who inform us of new cures and that they are ‘safe.’

But there is ancient wisdom in us that warns us of easy things. Among the people who are very suspicious of Semaglutide are, not surprisingly, those who would not be needing it. They are fit and usually misunderstood as ‘disciplined.’

It is one of our most bogus concepts—that some people can endure a degree of suffering to do the right thing, or, in other words, that some people are ‘disciplined.’ The fit are usually people who are simply lucky enough to enjoy physical exercise and who find it easy to stay away from fast carbs, or who have a strong useful vice, like vanity, that helps them make little sacrifices. Discipline is a name given to private procedures that come easy to some people and is plain suffering for most others. Even most ascetics in history who did painful things were probably aided more by their mental ailments than any resolve.

The fit ask others to be fit because it is in our nature to ask people to be like us, to do what comes easy to us. But the path to fitness makes most people miserable. I know people who start believing in mysterious injuries inside them just to save themselves from exercise, and who manufacture mental trauma just to eat some chocolate.

Modern food is a very powerful drug. So maybe it is only fair that the modern world has given us another drug in compensation.

I am trying hard to be compassionate, but lest you mistake me for a wonderful person, I should say I am among the people who believe that there can be no alternative to austere eating and exercise; not just exercise, but vigorous daily exercise. That is the way to be, I want to say, because that is way that comes easy to me. But I am unable to find a clinching argument against decadence. If people love eating, why shouldn’t they simply have a wonder drug? After all, half the world is alive today only because of medicines. I do believe though that what is called longevity today is merely a prolonging of death.

The fit do point out that Semaglutide has to be had forever, so its consumers will have to deal with the side effects forever. But then, people who eat frugally, too, have to do it forever. People who work-out, too, have to do it forever. Exercise has its own adverse side-effects, like injuries. I am just saying that the case against the drug is obvious but not terrifying, at least not terrifying to most people.

There is one argument against it, though. Just 20 years ago, only people who read a lot had access to knowledge. Not all of them were intuitive, so they could not make analytical leaps with it, but still they possessed some information. Today, knowledge can be Googled, even sought from a chatbot. Yet, there is a difference between a person who has the foundation of accumulating information the hard way and someone who is able to arrive at the same conclusion using technology. The muscle memory of labour lends depth to people. This muscle memory is, in fact, our true self. Our true health is not what we appear to be, but what the body knows it has gone through, what the body knows it can endure.





Do we really have any field of work that is lucrative?


2024-03-04

Every time farmers agitate in Delhi to cut a deal with the government, I wait for a slew of comments that say the “real issue” is that “farming is unremunerative.” This is said by those who have compassion for farmers and also those who dismiss their demands. What they mean, in modern parlance, is that farming has a bad revenue model. If the world’s most popular consumer behaviour, eating, cannot make food production “remunerative,” it makes me wonder what exactly is lucrative. Is there a field of human activity in which participants say, “Our profession is remunerative”? Some individuals do well in almost all professions, but almost all of entrepreneurship appears to be “unremunerative”. At least, at first glance.

Film producers are struggling. Almost all retailers are struggling. Most startups are not going to survive. There are venture capitalists who say they are struggling. All actors, except maybe a half a dozen, are struggling. Publishing is “unremunerative” for publishers and writers. Writers, in every form and genre of writing, are struggling. Even most politicians, who are actually entrepreneurs if we stop being humorous about what they really are, are struggling. All supremely talented athletes, barring a few at the very top in their discipline, are struggling. Take tennis. It appears to be lucrative, but players who are not in the top 100 struggle to make money. Most of them make a loss, as they have to bear the costs of their own travel and stay. Like other entrepreneurs, they have to hustle for side jobs. Last year, ESPN ran a story on the financial struggle of tennis pros. It featured Kiranpal Pannu, who was ranked 664th in the world in 2022. That year, “Pannu earned $6,771 in prize money. But his expenses, predominantly for travel, [were] $34,500.”

Unemployment or underemployment has dignified names. One of them is “investing in the market.” Kinder people would say that amateur stock trading is a form of entrepreneurship. If that is true, most traders too are struggling—the people who invest directly in making money from money. Most of them lose money, including those who read ‘technical charts.’ Speak to anyone who is not salaried, chances are they believe they are struggling. Even among the salaried, most people do not see themselves as struggling only because they know their incomes and that they cannot earn zero or less. But there are very few professions where the salaried are paid well, and even there, most workers don’t survive the ever-tapering ladder to the top. Thus most salaried people, too, are fated to become ‘entrepreneurs’ in fields that are ‘unremunerative.’

Why does the world appear to prosper while entrepreneurs struggle? Very few thrive and they make capitalism’s averages look good. Is that all there is to it? Is the promise of capitalism a myth?

There is a bit of doom in the very idea of entrepreneurship. Every entrepreneur sets out to make money in a line of business that has money in it. Yet, the reason it is not lucrative is that if profits were guaranteed, then everyone would flock to it and the finite bounty would have to be shared among an ever-expanding crowd of competitors until the guarantee falls apart.

It would appear that capitalism oversells itself through a small number of successes, whose success millions try to replicate and fail. When you look around society, don’t you get the feeling that everyone is in the middle of a spoof? People are imitating what they think the rich did to get rich, while the actual reason they got rich is never clear.

There is another reason entrepreneurs appear to struggle. Take agitating farmers. They are middle-class landholding entrepreneurs, and not farmhands on hire, who are salaried people. Most Indians seem to think of the typical farmer as an impoverished, oppressed man. There are some farmers who are this, but the poor and oppressed tillers are usually the landless, whose immediate oppressors are landholding farmers. The struggle of the landholding farmer is never to stave off hunger. From that low level, from that abyss of poverty, no entrepreneurship is possible. Extreme poverty only makes one think small. The struggle of the landholding farmer is always growth. In any business, to be still is to perish, because everything else around it is changing, and getting expensive.

So an entrepreneur is only a person who has high standards for the meaning of ‘remunerative.’ Entrepreneurs are actually doing well and, incredibly, they may not be entirely aware of it.

Something occurred to me when I was thinking about the hold of superstars on the film industry. I used to think of them as the problem. They take away most of the budget and profits, leaving little for the rest. But then I realized that the high fees of superstars increases the pay of others. A film producer, ‘character actor’ or screenwriter earns more in commercial movies than in art cinema only because film stars have inadvertently raised the bar for everyone.

What film stars demonstrate is that many professions are intrinsically ‘unremunerative’ but can become more lucrative if the field manufactures superstars. We can see this phenomenon in many professions, like all spectator sports, and even among heart surgeons. People are good at something, and that something is not very lucrative, and remains so unless the field has superstars. If the argument is not relevant to all streams of entrepreneurship, it is because some businesses do not have any superstars. Farming, for instance, does not have superstars.





We need to make freedom of speech low-brow in India


2024-03-11

In August 2022, a college professor in Maharashtra posted on a Whatsapp group his good wishes to Pakistan on its independence day. He also protested India’s revocation of the special status of Jammu and Kashmir. The police filed charges against him for “promoting enmity” between communities. Many months later, last Thursday, the Supreme Court threw out the case saying that Indians have a right to criticize the government, and to wish Pakistan on its independence day. We have become that sort of a nation where the Supreme Court has to listen to vacuous cases like this brought by a police force that is usually reluctant to register real complaints of women against molestation and harassment. The Supreme Court, in fact, said it is time to “educate our police” on freedom of speech.

It is a significant observation, but who is going to “educate our police”? That is the problem with the passive voice—you never get to know who has to perform the action denoted in the verb. Does the court envisage politicians taking the police aside and telling them, “Let people speak their minds, they have a right; democracy doesn’t mean the right to vote alone.” I don’t see it happening. In this paradise for the thin-skinned, every police station is in a race to book anyone who may have slighted the Prime Minister, his party, or any religion, caste, saint, language, or surname. Forget the police, the Bombay high court had refused to quash the FIR against the professor, saying, “In sensitive matters, any critical words or dissenting view must be expressed after proper analysis of the whole situation.” That was why the man had to go to India’s highest court.

The court’s observation will not alter the fact that India is silencing itself. Across society, no one knows what is safe to say. The last time this column covered free speech was a few months ago, when a senior leader of the Congress party was arrested for getting the Prime Minister’s name wrong. The column ended with this view: “There might be a Supreme Court ruling that will sound wise and modern, but harassments will go on.”

The Supreme Court indeed has passed yet another wise observation. But that is not going to inspire people to speak up. For that to happen, the idea of freedom of expression has to be made low-brow, it has to be de-intellectualized.

Free speech is an intrinsically esoteric freedom because it is an unnatural right that is contradictory to human nature. Not that humans don’t like to express themselves. Of all the animals, we speak the best by far, and the very idea of speaking is to state what is on our minds. But as a right, as a right to defy, annoy or insult powerful people, it simply did not exist for most of human civilization. Why would the powerful grant that? That is what makes it esoteric, like the right to privacy. It is too Westernized to become a mass demand in India. Also, it has terrible ambassadors—well-meaning intellectuals who are so unpopular today that they end up being bad ambassadors of everything they endorse.

Despite this, freedom of expression has the potential to become a mass right, like food and water. It is odd for me to say it today, because our freedom of speech has shrunk in the last decade or so. We were never a free society, but politicians and the media could say stuff and get away. This freedom did not come from the Constitution, as intellectuals claim. In fact, the founders of the nation were not big fans of free expression as an absolute right. Not Gandhi, not Ambedkar and not even Nehru, despite the story of his chiding a cartoonist who had not roasted him enough in his cartoons.

India’s actual freedom of speech was never framed as a formal freedom. It was a way of life. It originated in political campaigning and the seeming naturalness of the news media fairly reporting the words of politicians. India’s free speech came from the same place from where Indians still derive their right to drive on the wrong side of the road. From chaos, ambiguity and vast rustic informality. A part of that chaos has gone. We can still drive on the wrong side of the road, but we cannot say even truths about some things anymore. More than ever, the government is in fierce control of the country’s destiny, and many of the freedoms we once enjoyed because of our chaotic ways, have gone.

Even so, because freedom of expression was never practised in India as an esoteric ideal, it has a chance to go mainstream. In its heydays, it tapped into what is primitive in humans —simply the need to say stuff.

How to make this freedom low-brow? That would have something to do with how change happens in the first place. A society changes not because good guys win. They almost never do. A society changes when the second-rung tries to pull down the top-run by claiming to fight for the rights of the lowest rung. This is how the world changed, how slavery ended, how monarchy ended, how democracy grew. From the self-interest of the second-rung.

In a repressed society, telling a good joke commands a huge premium. Politicians who feel oppressed by the dominance of the ruling party can take a low-risk-high-return gamble by saying stuff no one can say anymore. Comedians and other kinds of entertainers whose works are not as high-investment as cinema, too, can take a shot. They can risk jail for ‘speaking’ entertaining truths about some sacred men. And we might just realize that the sacred are not as powerful as they first appeared.





Indian sophistication on stray dogs can be confusing


2024-03-17

Now and then, stray dogs tear a child apart. Old people too. This is rare. But they do kill thousands of Indians every year in a less dramatic way, through rabies, and dozens of other diseases. The World Health Organization speculates the figure could be 20,000. Of these, “30% to 60%” are children under the age of 15. Most of them must be poor because if this had happened to middle-class people or the rich, India would have probably exterminated stray dogs by now. Lakhs of Indians are bitten every year; innumerable motorcyclists fall when they are chased by dogs.

Yet, in dealing with stray dogs, India has among the most compassionate regimes in the world. Some of the laws that protect homeless dogs are so thoughtful that it would appear a stray dog has infiltrated law-making. In India, public spaces and private colonies are territories of stray dogs. If a dog mauls and kills a child, the dog would be taken away for a few days and observed. If it does not appear aggressive, it would be returned to the very place it had attacked the child. And people cannot be stopped from feeding it.

This is confusing because except for animal rights, in all other aspects, India has evolved into a practical unsophisticated middle-class nation that has no patience for esoteric liberal values like ‘free speech’ or ‘privacy.’ The fount of liberal sophistication, the West, has long got rid of its stray dog problem chiefly by killing them. Yet, a small group of global animal lovers has managed to pressure India into enacting sophisticated laws that favour dogs over the human poor.

Stray dogs are an easy civic problem to solve, and very difficult moral problem. People who claim to love them should be asked to do more than attach a collar on them, or feed them on the roads. They should take them home. The other solution is euthanizing them. But even people who suggest this when they chat with me refuse to be quoted.

Ryan Lobo is a wildlife filmmaker and a moderate lover of dogs, but does not imagine dogs are his children. Nevertheless, he cannot help but see something of a child in a canine. He is among the activists who are fighting animal lovers in courts and in the media. He says India’s protection of stray dogs is bad for Indians and stray dogs. Lobo says there are probably 80 million stray dogs in India, and they have to be removed from public spaces. He says sterilization does not work. “It’s a well-known fact globally that sterilization as a population control measure is meant for owned dogs. It’s not meant for free-ranging stray dogs.” Apart from the fact that it is ineffective, the other problem is that it does not make dogs go away. “The effects remain. So a sterilized dog can still bite you and it can still pick up any of 40 or 50 diseases and transmit them. And statistically, or you could say logistically, it’s not possible to vaccinate 60-80 million dogs a year without abysmal failure, which is what we see.”

Do humans have a primary right over their environment? I have no moral answer to this question. However, there is a practical answer. Almost every aspect of human life is based on the natural instinct of any species to exert control over its environment. Seen that way, yes, like any animal, we have a primary right over our environment. But then the human instinct of compassion has saved millions of human lives and given purpose to a civilization that otherwise has no meaning. So, maybe putting up with harmful animals is a price we pay for being beneficiaries of compassion. Even so, India’s decision to sacrifice human welfare, especially of the poor who are forced to share the immediate environment with stray dogs, is not a carefully calculated moral position. It is mostly moral laziness and the feudal triumph of a section of the middle-class that has devised a moral camouflage to justify its love for dogs above humans.

Also, India’s dog laws are the triumph of evolution’s investment in cuteness. “Dogs have adapted,” Lobo says, “to gel with human beings. So, you know, the eye movement, the muscles around the eyes in dogs are very highly developed. They’re very different from wolves, which don’t have the same muscles. So, when you look at a dog, the dog raises its eyebrows.” Also, dogs have realized it is profitable to “mimic an infant.”

For the violence of stray dogs, animal lovers fault human behaviour. They say the mannerisms of people provoke dogs. Don’t get nervous, they say, and dogs won’t bite you. This is partly true, partly false and partly also daft.

Some people are naturally very comfortable around stray dogs, and some just cannot be so relaxed. It is similar to how some people are not scared of snakes while most are. Also, the behaviour of stray dogs depends on circumstance. They can seem endearing when you are in a car, or in other safe enclaves of Indian life. But when you are on a cycle or motorcycle, or running down desolate stretches, there is a very real risk of being bitten no matter what lovely sounds you generate. On Goa’s beaches, there are packs of as many as 30 dogs. At around six in the morning, there would be no one around you for miles, just packs of dogs. Sometimes they come charging. Mostly, they just want to play. Or they themselves don’t know what they want.

As with people, there is a tiring ordinariness to the sweetness of stray dogs. They are quite lovely to those over whom they have no power, and dangerous to the vulnerable, like little children, or even an adult who is far outnumbered.





Why the arrest of Kejriwal may have big consequences


2024-03-24

There might be some people who think like this: India’s Enforcement Directorate (ED) is an independent investigative body that has gone after some key people in the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) purely to rid the nation of corruption. But I personally do not know a single person who thinks this.

There is a perception that Arvind Kejriwal was arrested on Thursday night for political reasons. Even so, people believe that the ED must have some sort of dirt on AAP to prove its claim that Kejriwal took kickbacks to devise a liquor policy that favoured some “wholesalers from the south.” Otherwise, how could a sitting chief minister of Delhi be arrested from his home, and his former deputy, Manish Sisodia, spend so many months in jail?

As publicly known so far, what the ED has as evidence against them in the Delhi liquor policy case are statements of co-accused who turned approvers. If there is further evidence, we do not yet know.

While denying bail to Sisodia, who has been in prison since February 2023, the Supreme Court observed that just because a policy enriches some people, and it is natural for government policy to benefit some people, it does not automatically prove that politicians adopted it for kickbacks. The ED is yet to show a money trail establishing that AAP leaders received bribes.

The liquor policy case has demonstrated the ease with which the ED can put popular politicians in jail under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA) and the reluctance of courts to grant bail. What is the consequence of this extraordinary phase in Indian politics? What is the consequence of Kejriwal finding himself in a lock-up on corruption charges?

I guess that the Bharatiya Janata Party’s analysis is that it stands to gain. The typical BJP supporter may not be enraged by Kejriwal’s arrest, but I am certain there are millions of voters who are.

People in general do not like bullying. Especially in South India. This is probably because when a person seems to be getting bullied, onlookers are reminded of their own bullies. Also, even though the BJP is clearly wary of Kejriwal’s charms, it appears to underestimate an important aspect of his popularity. Many people who do not vote for him still like and admire him. Many people are found to admire Kejriwal, whose party has swept Delhi assembly elections more than once, for understanding what many Indians want—good education for their children and free quality healthcare. So the arrest of Kejriwal could have increased his heft as politician.

Another consequence of his arrest is not so obvious —the de-intellectualization of the sacredness of institutions.

It is now becoming clear to the average Indian why institutions are important, and this realization is dawning without the annoying mascots of institutions—sanctimonious scholars and activists. It is not an easy realization because from a voter’s point of view, the government’s right of way is strong and obvious. That institutions, like courts, investigative agencies and the Election Commission, should be equal counterweights to an elected government is usually a pious argument made by Indian intellectuals that seems more like an expression of their own fight for relevance. The government, however, is an expression of the people; how can it fulfil their broad wishes if institutions come in the way? Aren’t institutions, after all, the fiefdom of eggheads whom people rarely elect?

In fact, aren’t modern governments in all democratic countries an expression of mass distaste for the intellectual class and bureaucracy? And if a government appears to be unethical, isn’t this just another reflection of human nature? How then can scholars and clerks hinder the actions of a government elected by the people? And on the question of ethics and morality, what right do some bureaucrats have to decide what they are?

But then, Kejriwal’s arrest has amplified the importance of institutions as emphasized in civics lessons from school. In this way, the arrest of the AAP leader may have inadvertently done more to underline the importance of independent institutions, especially the courts, than any other event in recent memory.

If it comes to be that a court hears Kejriwal’s plea for justice, and he comes to court himself to exploit the occasion as a politician, some ludicrous aspects of the money laundering act could be laid bare for the public. The Supreme Court may put the extraordinary powers that can be exercised under the PMLA to a test of consistency with basic principles. If the Court could deem electoral bonds illegal, as it recently did, perhaps a draconian law could get a similar look-in as well.

If that happens, it would demonstrate that unelected institutions could act in a more democratic way than a government. Ordinary people might then be able see that an institution is an election of ideas. There is campaigning and persuasion, even biases and superstars. Eventually, the fittest idea wins, and the fittest idea is usually the most ethical idea that has considerable public support.

There is an aspect of a nation’s moral character that cannot be measured by votes, and need not be measured at all. It just wins. Because it protects everyone from bullies.





There’s probably no such thing as soft power any longer


2024-03-31

Over the past five years, the West has worried that India is losing its values, by which it means that India is not trying to imitate the West. Even despots are wondering what is up with India. Every country wants other countries to have Western values. India does not seem to care about its image in general, but in some regards, it clearly does. So, now and then, it contemplates using something called ‘soft power.’

A nation’s soft power is usually a bit of weird overrated food, and a bit of song-and-dance by mediocre artists who are close to the establishment, all in the hope that the display would make the world think highly of the nation. The concept of soft power presumes that people in Belfast would eat some biryani and think India is wonderful.

There is indeed such a thing as soft power. Just that I don’t think governments have much to do with it. For instance, according to my taxi-driver journalism in the Maldives, people there seem to have no affection at all for India, politically, except when they speak of the Chinese. But many of them love Hindi films. I’ve not even heard of some of the films they go on about. I do not believe that they have developed any affection for India because of their love for Bollywood. The Indian film star is distinct from the Indian government. Hindi film stars may even be popular in many Asian countries precisely because they are not from the government.

A few weeks ago, news broke that eight Indian Navy vets were facing the death penalty in Qatar on espionage charges. When they were released, there was a rumour that India had requested Shah Rukh Khan to persuade Qatar to spare their lives. He vehemently denied this, but when I first heard it, it struck me as probable. Even so, I do not believe that the popularity of Shah Rukh Khan or Bollywood has enhanced India’s image. Bollywood cannot sell India.

In Quentin Tarantino’s Once Upon a Time in Hollywood, Bruce Lee is portrayed as a garrulous clown. Unable to bear him a Caucasian man picks up Bruce Lee and flings him against a car. In response to this disrespect, China banned the film. Never has China shown so much love for an American. For that was what Bruce Lee was; born in America, an American and a citizen of British Hong Kong. The world loved Bruce Lee thinking he was Chinese. The world loved him without loving China.

When organic popular culture can’t make a nation endearing, what chance does government-issue soft power have? Soft power has altered global perceptions of only two nations. Britain and the US. But even that was a long time ago; such things not happen today.

Britain not only befriended the regions it plundered, it also somehow made them read its playwrights, novelists and insufferable philosophers. It even inspired people to use the term ‘British humour’ and pretend they know what it is.

All this created the foundation of a powerful idea that the West is a moral force, and that it is deeply sorry for all the colonizing it did. In reality, the West is a way of speaking, of articulating the right things, which has infected the elites in most nations. The Western moral compass was highly influential in the previous generation, but it was a bit too noble to survive the democratization of opinion.

For many decades now, Britain has been replaced by the US as the largest exporter of culture, even though, like Britain, it doesn’t have a half-decent cuisine. Hollywood, pop culture, black sugary drinks and buns that can kill humans made America endearing. Probably because the American government was not directly involved. It is probable that the Central Intelligence Agency did use culture to fight its battles by triggering moral agitations in other countries or by translating, publicizing and canonizing Russian writers who made Russia look horrible.

The most influential soft power of America and Britain was their independent news media. It was influential because the morality of American journalism mostly matched the propaganda of the US government. So America never needed ‘state media,’ unlike Russia or China.

In a world that is not so naive anymore, even Western soft power does not work. Yet, many governments have torturous programmes to promote their middling culture with the hope that the world will hold inaccurate and flattering views of them. There is a widely perceived success story, though.

There is much talk about how the South Korean government promoted its ‘soft power’ by amplifying K-pop and soap operas. This compliment is odd, because K-pop is an imitation of Western pop. And Asians and Latin Americans probably know that melodramatic Korean TV series are not unique to Korea. Even if it is true that South Korea manipulated millions of foreigners into enjoying Western culture masquerading as Korean, how has it improved perceptions of Korea? If anything, Western interest in Korea attracted foreign journalists who inevitably did those ‘underbelly’ stories. The globalization of ‘Korean culture’ also inspired a film called Parasite, which may seem Korean to foreigners but was meant for a ‘global’ audience. And ‘global’ we know usually does not include Ethiopia or Sri Lanka. Parasite was designed for the West that had got curious about Korea and it showed South Korea in very poor light.

The reason why culture is unremarkable PR for a nation is that all cultures are fascinating in moderation, and people can only take foreign culture in moderation. Actually, people can barely tolerate their own culture.





No, neuroscientists don’t know much about the mind


2024-04-08

If you have ‘neuro’ in your bio, you can say just about anything about the mind, as though you know what it is. If you are situated in the West, and identify as male, you will be taken even more seriously. Andrew Huberman is one of several beneficiaries. He is also from Stanford, so conditions were perfect for him to begin a podcast about that thing people hyphenate with confidence: ‘mind-body.’ He used expressions like “peer reviewed” and it appeared to many that he spoke scientific truths. He attracted millions of listeners. He is so popular that even though you may not have heard his podcast or read him at all, a lot of advice that has come down to you from reformative types emerged from him. If you know people who have suddenly become morning antennas to “catch” sunlight or started buying products like ashwagandha, you indirectly know Huberman. His fame would suggest a world deeply interested in physical and mental fitness. You wouldn’t be able to guess that by looking around.

Huberman says a lot of commonsensical things and uses the sacred theology of science to persuade people—sleep well (somehow); eat fruits, vegetables, proteins and healthy fats; remember to drink water; stress is bad; physical exercise is good; as much as possible, stay away from computer screens. Which sane person can disagree with any of this? But he also says a lot of abstract things, like, for instance, that practising gratitude “activates neural circuits.” He offers some kind of “scientific” evidence, but some of us intuitively know, or “neurally” know, that you cannot say anything definite yet about a whole lot of human behaviour just because somethings lit up on electroencephalogram.

Generally, Huberman says that decent behaviour leads to physical and mental health. A reason why he is now the subject of a controversy. Not because some scientist found contradictory evidence on an EEG screen, but because, according to an article in New York magazine, Huberman cheated on some women. By modern standards of male disgrace, this is almost funny. But the magazine’s reasoning is that if Huberman is morally shady, he should not be taken so seriously as a ‘wellness’ guru.

What I find amusing is that what eventually diminished his aura somewhat was not the discovery that he was no more qualified than the rest of humanity to speak of the mind, but that some of his ex-girlfriends did not consider him an ideal human being (like their other ex-boyfriends perhaps).

From what I have seen, people who are likely to have excessive faith in Huberman and other neuro-gurus are not famous for their cold logic. They are usually life-long seekers of advice on how to be, and how to be happy. Inside them was a reasonless sorrow, to which they attached reasons and villains, but the sorrow itself never went. Most of their lives, they were consumers of the wellness industry. Once it only meant reading J. Krishnamurthy. Then came the “right way” to breathe and the rediscovery of some stretching exercises with names hinting of deep spiritual stuff. Every five years or so, there would a dramatic breakthrough in the global pursuit of ‘wellness,’ which would arrive through a fascinating person who was, oddly, always a male. Like Huberman. And another famous neuro-something, Sam Harris, who speaks about the nature of consciousness. Not that he should not; just that I do not see how he could know more about the mind than anyone else. The science of consciousness is not even in its infancy. Yet, people give Harris et al the first right to define the nature of being and the meaning of “meditation.”

Huberman says that we must be “mindful,” which is to live in the present (as we did during covid—how was it?). And we must introspect and learn a lot, and, of course, be grateful. And build muscles. What he seems to be saying is, ‘Be like me, why can’t you be like me.’ That is what many gurus often say.

When a man sets out to say ‘be like me,’ he usually knows what to say and how to say it. It is somehow useful for some wellness gurus to be narcissists. And, in my observation, there is frequently a bit of that in their ardent seekers too. They are so preoccupied with themselves, how they are feeling. A “wellness” session can look like alpha narcissists talking to beta narcissists.

Many people have defended Huberman saying that it is silly to humiliate him using the comments of anonymous ex-lovers. British actor Russell Brand said that Huberman is being targeted by some women because he is a very manly man who appears to enjoy being a manly man.

But some scholars have used Huberman’s disgrace to remind people that they always found his ‘science,’ too, dubious. Andrea Love, a biologist, argued on Slate.com that Huberman used scientific lingo to impress gullible people: “Huberman fills his podcast with confident displays of pseudoscience, topped with the appeal to authority he garners by regularly repeating his academic credentials to gain your trust.”

But then, when it comes to “wellness,” especially the part that involves the mind, there is not much of a difference between science and pseudoscience.

Once, only monks were taken seriously when they spoke of abstract matters, and only those monks who wore special robes or signalled in some other way that they were different from other humans, even as they said stuff like “I am you, you are me.” Today, ‘neuro’ is the new robe of the modern monk.





The elderly men who run the world give us hope


2024-04-15

The world seems tired of elderly men, but the feeling is not mutual. Many countries are run by old men, large corporations too, and also most housing societies, it would seem on most days. Some people appear to hold contempt for ageing men for not receding into irrelevance quietly. This is odd, because being old is the future of all, and what some of them have demonstrated is that ageing need not be the same as dying.

What must be going on in the head of US President Joe Biden as he prepares to run for office again at the age of 81? ‘Without me, the wrong kind of people will run America. I am the answer’? No other American presidential candidate has been this old. When a special counsel appointed by Biden’s own administration said that he is “a well-meaning, elderly man with a poor memory…” he was enraged.

Donald Trump has been mocking Biden’s age in more cruel ways. But Trump himself is 77.

How is it that people often sneer at the elderly who do not quit, especially men, yet they manage to control so much of the world?

The world appears jealous of the young, it has too many opinions about the young. People reward the old for denying the success of their peers. But their endurance does not interest me so much as their desire for power and respect. Desire is life.

All around me, I see elderly folks who have meekly receded into retirement and they struggle to fill their days. Some appear to feign concern for a wounded delivery agent, just for the chance to talk; they plot trips to hospitals purely for entertainment; former captains of industry are seen today picking fights with house helps and drivers.

But could this be what the world wants from the old? What else do people expect from their ageing parents? Don’t do anything interesting that might make you fall? Be with other elderly people, don’t get involved in too many things, assume that the lives of other people are more important and more precious? Be alive and dead at once? It’s convenient for us to imagine that all the old want to do is withdraw into a forest, and that they don’t do it only because there are not many forests around anymore. But is this what you would like to be when you are old?

The elderly are the only real outcaste left. I can say that even for a country like India. A lot of caste strife is misunderstood as oppression. Indians do practise caste, but on most days, it is more classification than discrimination. Yet, there is a group of people who often get looked down upon for no reason other than their age.

One of the great old men of our times is Clint Eastwood. At 93, he is in the middle of directing his next film. On his persistence with life, he has said, “I try to get up and be productive, and don’t let the old man in.”

Most successful old men were healthy young men who were either genetically lucky, or who trained their bodies to get lucky.

As a Malayalee, I know how common and easy it can be for the elderly to be healthy. Health and fitness at two different things. Fitness is tough and of no importance to most people. But it is truly within the reach of most people to age with enough health to keep working, and to long for something, and come in the way of the undeserving young who think they have the first right to the new world just because they were born later.

Longing is healthy in the old. But there is a longing that is often considered taboo for old men—sex. It is possible that old men do not lose interest in it, and I really hope they don’t, but what may interest them sexually attracts social reproach. Because it is the instinct of the world to protect young women from old men. “If the old men hog the young women, what will be the future of the species?” J.M. Coetzee writes in Disgrace, “Half of literature is about it: young women struggling to escape from under the weight of old men, for the sake of the species.”

A way of the world is that it moves mountains to help young women escape from under the weight of old men, but easily surrenders everything else to patriarchs.

It may appear that I am a fan of elderly men, but I am not.

Even as a kid, I never fully believed that the old had some great wisdom in them. In fact, I thought most of them were just kids in ageing bodies. Even so, the natural right of the young to replace the old is plain absurd because the smartness of the young is more overrated than the wisdom of the old.

Most people in their twenties know very little. And a 30-year-old is usually only a 20-year-old who has learnt how to pretend he knows something. People in their forties are infected with a sense of doom and failure, as if they already are in the infancy of old age. In their fifties, a lot of people have already given up. So why sneer at some ambitious old men who thrive? We must instead learn from them how they endure.

Elderly men protect themselves by ignoring the most lethal wisdom that has influenced the world—that adaptation is survival. They survive by not changing, by not ‘adjusting’ to the demands their external environment. That is why Max Planck said, “…truth doesn’t triumph by convincing its opponents and making them see the light but rather because its opponents eventually die…”

Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series ‘Decoupled’.





Palestinian puzzle: Could low-stakes compassion be dangerous?


2024-04-22

Hamas has the most sophisticated defence system. It uses Palestinian civilians as a shield. David Brooks, in his column in the New York Times, wrote, “Hamas’s goal is to maximize the number of Palestinians who die… Hamas’s survival depends on support in the court of international opinion.” This was always the strategy of Hamas. If terrorists have powerful uses for our compassion, then the question arises whether it is dangerous to have the sort of compassion they want.

But then, we can argue that we are not always in control of our compassion. It may be used for tactical purposes, but human compassion itself is a natural resource of the world, like air and the oceans. And, it cannot be just turned on or off just because the wrong sort of people mine it. In that case, does a natural resource contain within it great dangers for the very people it cares for?

Fast-forming global compassion for far-away issues is new to human nature. The history of how the world has felt sorry for Palestine is brief. The point I began to witness this history was in the mid-80s, as an average Indian boy. Israel appeared to be a valiant small nation surrounded by dangerous foes. And a man called Yasser Arafat was somehow one of the most recognizable men in the world. But it was hard to figure out why they were fighting. In the 80s, if you did not understand something, you had to read a whole book. Actually, even today that is the only way, but there are illusory options like “10 things you should know about Palestine” and so on. Outside the Levant, very few knew much about the Palestine conflict.

Then, with the advent of the internet, everybody skipped a step. It was not information that flowed, but a peculiar mix of information and the emotion of its source. Since then, the region has been erupting every now and then, usually because an Israeli attack has killed civilians. And the world has erupted in rage against Israel. It is every generation’s introduction to proxy outrage.

Until a year ago, nobody fully accepted the view that Hamas hid behind and beneath civilians. It was dismissed as Israeli propaganda. In 2014, when Israeli bombardment in Gaza killed several children, there was massive global anger against Israel. Palestinians were always good with their propaganda, as it was a part of their defence mechanism. The internet was filled with images of Israelis on comfortable sofas, watching Gaza being bombed from vantage points. People shared images with comments like “disgusting” on social media, probably sitting on comfortable sofas themselves.

People who live far away from a conflict zone develop simple views of ‘victims’ and ‘villains’. In 2014, if you tried to point this out, or the fact that Hamas hid among the civilians not just in defence but also to get civilians killed, you were quickly disgraced as heartless.

Compassion for far-away people is a feature of modernity. Imagine a time in ancient India, in Magadha perhaps. A group of young people are having boiled asparagus and mild tea, when a messenger walks in to say that in Kosala there has been a massacre of civilians in a market. Magadhans are outraged. “Sick,” someone says. And they engrave slogans on a bronze plate and march with them in protest against the massacre. I don’t think this ever happened. I cannot substantiate it, but I suspect that in antiquity, there was no long-distance compassion for people who did not belong to one’s race, region or caste. Even today, the most visible outrage is in the West, which is not only a physical place, but also a way of being. I don’t think most Indians, for example, are outraged by much outside what directly concerns them.

Just because a human feeling did not come from antiquity, it does not mean it is not human nature. Modernity might be the name of a time, but it is also the character of a time. And the character of our age is that the elite among us feel strongly for people far away, especially when the cost of feeling sorry is low. Hamas always knew that. The world would have been a wonderful place if people felt this level of compassion for those much closer to them. But the way of the world is that people feel more compassion for Palestinians than for their spouses.

I know a person who has very strong views about Islam in India, but about five years ago when he visited Palestine, he was enraged by Israel, by “what they are doing to the poor Palestinians.” Time and again we see that there is no such thing as a global right-wing. People are ‘logical’ about the oppression of minorities at home, but compassionate about what is going on far away.

So what? What are people expected to do when they read that scores of children have died in a school or a hospital because Israel was hunting some terrorists underneath? How can we not feel the pain of those people? So this is ultimately another way of asking how must we be? How should we be?

The answer is in the people who have not easily shown their feelings for Palestinians. Not counting Jews, Muslims and others who have stakes in the conflict, I feel there are broadly three kinds of people who are not easily outraged by Israel. One, people who dislike or fear Islam. Two, people who instinctively side with the strong. The third group should interest us. They are people who are helplessly objective, who demonstrate that this is a personality type. Wary of global emotions, they know every conflict has two sides, and only one side makes for great photojournalism. They know their emotions are valuable and never give it away cheap. I think this is a good way to be.





on life: It is beautiful, and without any magic


2024-04-28

An odd quality of the Western intellectual world is that its giants take simplistic questions very seriously. It is as though social equality makes it hard for them to be dismissive of majority opinions that are usually very naive. For instance, almost every Western intellectual superstar finds the need to denounce God. But how sophisticated can any argument against God be? Stripped of all ornaments of articulation, such debates cannot be qualitatively any different from what we used to have in high school. But there is a related question that Western intellectuals are obsessed with, which is more complex and for that reason highly entertaining: Is there magic? Is life mystical? Are some things, plainly, spooky?

In my view, most people who are called philosophers are not that at all. Most of them are fans of philosophy, or actors who simulate thinkers. But I have for several years grown to accept what Daniel Dennett suspected about himself—that he was a philosopher, even though he was also known as a ‘cognitive scientist.’ Dennett died last week of what some people would call old age. But he was only 82.

He said there is no magic, and even as he persuaded us to let go of our last hope of a mystical world, he somehow made it seem that the alternative was more entertaining. He said there was no magic in the mind, especially the human mind which can perceive itself as a mind. He said the mental can be physically explained; every aspect of the mind can be explained as we understand more and more about our physical body. If there is a human soul, it would not faze him. To him, the soul was probably more of a semantic problem. Whatever it might be, it’s made up of millions of tiny robots called cells, and smaller robots inside these cells, robots inside robots inside robots, all of them together creating the idea of the self, of consciousness, of a life that regards itself as life. No magic is required. He found this more beautiful than a mystical world where the Universe has a point to its existence.

We should not have happened. Human life was a freak accident. “Evolution is a process that depends on amplifying things that almost never happen,” he wrote in one of his many books, From Bacteria to Bach and Back. A mutation in DNA almost never happens. “Not once in a billion copyings—but evolution depends on it.”

The fact that we happened is astonishing. But having happened, it is not so astonishing that we think we did not happen by chance. We look at our rare occurrence and marvel at how many things had to go right, against steep odds, and wonder if there is someone out there who is responsible, or “some force” as some people say to sound scientific.

Dennett points out that many complex things in nature are so exquisite that they appear to have purpose but are a series of logical accidents. For instance, the intricate and exquisite colonies of termites. These insects don’t know what they are doing. They build their cathedrals robotically because they are programmed to do that. There is something individually ‘mindless’ about the hive-mind. The termite colony is an architectural phenomenon that has ensured the survival of a species, yet it has no purposeful design, Dennett says, unlike Antoni Gaudi’s church in Barcelona.

The human brain is more like a termite colony than a magnificent church. Our brain is the evolution and synchronization of millions of mindless robots called neurons, the cells that form our nervous system. Dennett writes that neurons were once organisms with their own plans, but now they constitute the brain. Modern neurons “are in effect the domesticated descendants of very ancient eukaryotes… Composed of billions of idiosyncratic neurons that evolved to fend for themselves, the brain’s functional architecture is more like a free market than a ‘politburo’ hierarchy where all tasks are assigned from on high.”

The fact that millions of tiny robots can create not just the brain, but also the idea of the self, made him worry about artificial intelligence (AI). He could never underestimate what a cluster of lifeless things can eventually become. Even there, even in the possibility of AI simulating human life, there is no magic. It can be perfectly explained.

For someone who denounced magic, Dennett also said there was no free will. At first brush, that sounds like a nod to magic.

One day, you step out of the house for a walk and instead of taking a left turn, you turn right. Was it inevitable? But why should the universe make that decision; doesn’t it have grander things to do? We can see all of universe as deterministic; filled with dominos whose fates are preordained by an event from the beginning of time. But doesn’t life break that? Isn’t life chaotic enough for random actions to determine outcomes?

Dennett was probably not so interested in microcosmic free will—what made you turn right. He couldn’t have known, anyway. His idea of free will concerned the larger arcs of life. When we make a choice, he said, we appear to use information to make a rational decision, or a rebellious one. But that is not what led to our choice. Our mind is a cauldron of emotions and biases; it already knows what it is going to do, but is not aware of it. Many human decisions, he argued, were pre-ordained, a continuation of long chains of events. Choices are made for us by forces that are too strong for us to control.

So, maybe yes, there was a powerful reason why you turned right. It was inevitable that you would turn right. But even in that, there is probably no magic.





How do noble proposals like an inheritance tax arise?


2024-05-05

Sam Pitroda was one of the most famous men in India in the 1980s. As the seer of Indian telecom, he was responsible for millions of long-distance calls by Indians getting through. He was perhaps too suave to win an election, yet he was among the most powerful men in India because Rajiv Gandhi took his advice very seriously. A few days ago, Pitroda said that India should adopt an inheritance tax and that the wealth of the rich should be redistributed. It was a very 1980s moment from a star of the 1980s. The BJP portrayed his statement as part of the Congress manifesto, which is not true.

What Pitroda said should have been one of the most unimportant statements about the future of India, but because of who he once was and because general elections are going on, it received disproportionate interest. Even so, India’s poor should have loved what he said. After all, what he said was that when the rich die, some of their money should be taken away from their kin and given to the poor. Yet, the BJP amplified his message as though this was a nation filled with billionaires; the Congress said he was speaking on his own and distanced itself from his views. Many young men and women who appeared to be from modest backgrounds went to a Congress office to protest against the idea of the inheritance tax and “wealth redistribution.”

What is useful about the controversy is the rare peek it offers us into how humane ideas arise. There is something about the way Pitroda said it, and the fact that he even said it, that tells us how such ideas may have come about in other countries. (India, too, had an estate tax, but it was abolished by the Rajiv Gandhi government in 1985.)

How does society bring in reforms when powerful people stand to lose from change?

You can say that change happens because good people bring about good things. You can say that Pitroda wants an inheritance tax because he is better than most of us and wants to change the destinies of the poor. This could be true, but what if something else is going on?

If reform is not brought about by the uncontainable good of good people, then what causes it? Why do good things happen?

The reformation of a society can be explained without giving too much credit to reformers and the naïveté of imagining that some human beings are more noble than others, and that the good guys somehow win some battles. Society changes for the better when the second rung of social power takes on the most powerful. This is usually done in the name of the poor, for a moral cause.

The other reason society changes is that children do not want to be their parents. Sometimes this includes children of rich parents with exaggerated contempt for some qualities of their parents that leads them to do what their parents would never do, especially virtuous things. But mostly, change occurs because of the first reason: Because the second rung, the aristocracy, gets tired of the royalty of their time. What could hurt royalty more than society taking away half of what these royals planned to bequeath to their genetic offspring?

Pitroda was probably never a billionaire, but he was part of the elite of a time when class and sophistication alone could take you high up social peaks. In a changing world, a very different sort of people now occupy those peaks. Even India’s new capitalists look different from his time.

What would you do if you were him and wanted to take on the new elite? You would start by doing something that would upset them. Maybe you would suggest that their children should not get to inherit their fortunes freely. They should pay a price for their luck.

Often, policy activism is a war of millionaires against billionaires. This was the origin of that celebrated document, the Magna Carta, from where modern democracy probably emerged. To fix the king, the barons of England had to say modern things. That the king would not punish a person until guilt is proven, or that the state will not usurp the land of its people, and that in peacetime England would protect merchants as they plied their trade. Even the French Revolution was not as simple as the poor revolting against the elite—it was a risky uprising of aristocrats against their bosses in the name of social reform. India’s freedom movement itself was, among other things, a kind of class struggle between the top two classes of the time, the British and the local elite.

There is a sort of inequality that looks bad in statistics. For instance, when you look at the top 1% and how much of a nation’s wealth they own. But there is another sort of inequality that never shows up in our statistics, which is far less natural but more poisonous. It does not feature billionaires. It is the imbalance that favours the upper middle class on every turf where they compete with those who are poorer than them.

Billionaires and their children are not in competition with the rest of society. Except for the roads perhaps, there is no resource, no aspect of life that they are forced to share with other classes. But if you consider millionaires or the country’s vast upper middle-class, they do compete with the rest of society in entrance exams, business startups, cinema, literature and the arts. And they have an unfair head-start created not only by ancestral wealth, but more effectively by social contacts. Seen this way, billionaires have a far smaller role in inequality than the upper middle-class.





The fabled charms of heritage red-light areas are bogus


2024-05-12

I was in Pakistan in 2004 to cover a historic cricket series. In Lahore, it was inevitable that someone would offer to take me to Heera Mandi. By then, the place had gentrified enough for the offer to be respectable, but still something of its ‘red-light’ part was alive enough for Indian cricketers not to visit, at least publicly. For instance, Rahul Dravid, who had thrilled Pakistanis by demonstrating his curiosity by visiting Mohenjo Daro, stayed away from Heera Mandi.

I was a bit nervous because of an incident a few days earlier. I had noticed that on street corners, hawkers sold pornographic CDs whispering, “Indian, Indian.” Mystified, I asked what happened to Pakistani films. Such a thing, I soon understood, was not asked even by locals.

No matter the actual provenance of the movies on sale, they were all called ‘Indian.’ Worse, it was clear I was Indian. I had to leave immediately. So I wondered how an average Pakistani on the street in Heera Mandi would react to an Indian entering a house of ill-repute. I wondered how long I would take to say in Hindi that I was there just for the dance performances, assuming that was okay.

At the time of my visit, and probably even now, Heera Mandi was bustling with life till the early hours, which was not unusual for Lahore because it had a thriving late-dining scene, probably to compensate for having no public drinking. Lahore had places that looked like pubs, where a hunk in a small tee would sit on a high stool, holding a mug, but with cola inside.

Its restaurant scene, though, was way ahead of Delhi’s or Mumbai’s. There was a place where you could eat as many groundnuts as you wanted and throw their shells on the floor, while Pakistanis dressed as cowboys gave you dirty looks to sustain the cowboy theme.

There were such posh restaurants in and around Heera Mandi. As I got talking to the locals there, an odd recurring element emerged. Several people claimed to be descendants of famous Pakistani men in history who had visited Heera Mandi. Now, Pakistanis are among the funniest people I know, so I wonder if that was a part of their poker-faced humour or they were trying to con a journalist. Or were they serious?

Heera Mandi was a network of narrow lanes near a mosque built by Aurangzeb. Music filled the air. Flanking the lanes were old houses with little rooms filled with dozens of people watching Indian cable TV, except news channels, which were banned. In some rooms, three TV sets played with the audio of all at high volume.

I was taken to one such room, where there were some musicians and a decorated young woman in a kurta and churidaar. I had recently learnt the difference between a churidaar and salwaar. A Pakistani fashion designer had told me that Indians didn’t know how to cut a churidaar and Pakistanis didn’t know how to cut a salwaar.

When I entered, the musicians came alive, and they shut the doors, of which there were several. And suddenly, we were alone with them and the woman in a room. They began to play what to my South Indian ears was nautch-girl music, and the woman began to dance in a ridiculous fashion, as though she was a feminist mocking me. It was the opposite of seduction.

But then, even done right, that is the dance of nautch girls. She twirled, and we arrived at a Mughal cultural mystery. When you twirl, the kurta’s hem forms a ring. What was the big deal? It was just physics. Why was this some cultural high-point? I had seen the twirl in Mughal-e-Azam, and I am certain it is there in Bhansali’s films. The woman in the room kept dancing. I was 29, and I was bored.

Maybe I had been sucked into a tourist trap. Maybe behind some other door, there was something more sensuous, something straight out of a Hindi film. From what I could see, Heera Mandi was dull, and it was not as though I was from an exciting place—I lived in Mumbai then. I wondered where all the history had gone.

People had told me that Heera Mandi was once filled with the most beautiful women in the world. And that they were well-versed in many arts. For some mysterious reason, courtesans in many countries were intellectually versatile, as though that was what men who went to red-light districts wanted—the renaissance woman.

In that place, there was no history. Of the history I had heard and read, there was no influence. Do historians overrate history? In many places, history is the first thing that goes. It erodes almost at the speed of time. Heritage survives only in all the things that are dear to the elite. Everywhere else, people don’t own their heritage, no matter how beautiful it is, and they replace it with something modern and grotesque.

Bhansali is often accused of making the past more beautiful than it was and his characters more spectacular than real. But there is a Bhansali in everyone who takes a tour of an old red-light district. There is something bogus about its charms, maybe because the people who love dead red-light districts would never tolerate a live red-light district. They are more in love with the deceased part than the red-light part. They wish to borrow some safe notoriety, or safe seediness, to make up for bad overpriced food.





Alice Munro reported from inside the heads of women


2024-05-19

She died on 13 May at the age of 92. When she was awarded the Nobel prize for literature in 2013, she became the first person to receive the honour exclusively for short stories, and one of the very few laureates, I feel, who were easy to read and a delight.

Her common analysis of herself as a writer was that she was a woman who was primarily interested in the lives of women and what women experienced. The result was not always compassion for women; but also something sterner, something more useful.

The narrator in her short story Friend of my Youth tells us, “…mother had grown up in a time and a place when sex was a dark undertaking for women. She knew that you could die from it. So, she honoured the decency, the prudery, the frigidity, that might protect you. And I grew up in horror of that very protection, the dainty tyranny that seemed to me to extend to all areas of life, to enforced tea parties and white gloves and all other sorts of tinkling inanities. I favoured bad words and a breakthrough, I teased myself with the thought of a man’s recklessness and domination.”

She did write the male point of view sometimes. I don’t know what it is about the male characters of even great female writers, but these men make fine observations about curtains and upholstery. For instance, this moment in the short story, The Bear Came Over the Mountain: “Grant caught sight of two layers of front-window curtains, both blue, one sheer and one silky, a matching blue sofa and a daunting pale carpet…”

Munro was kind to men, even considerate perhaps. When she reveals that Grant, who is married to the central character of the story, used to have affairs with his students, Munro appears to explain that it was very good for his spirits: “What he felt was mainly a gigantic increase in well-being… He ran up steps two at a time. He appreciated as never before a pageant of torn clouds and winter sunsets seen from his office window, the charm of antique lamps… Come summer, he learned the names of flowers.”

Munro has said that when she started writing, only women read stories and men did something seemingly more important outside their homes. This contributed to her initial success around a time when the most influential writers in Canada were all men. Even today, I am certain that most of Munro’s readers are women. Most readers of stories are women. They are the primary readers of men, too.

Male writers, in general, do not believe that they write about men, or that they are primarily interested in the lives of men. They would claim that their interest is wider and universal, about humans and not gender. They might be more wrong than they think, nevertheless most of their readers are women. The literary success of men is often a reward given by women.

In a previous column, I had written that women appreciate the works of men, they are generous to exceptional men, but men, in general, do not engage much with the works of exceptional women. It is this gap in generosity that partly finances the progress of men. A similar imbalance in interest favours the West and its artists.

We engage more with their works than they do with ours. In this imbalance, Munro is a beneficiary. Indians who have never read a single Indian short story may have read Munro. She may not have read any book by an Indian. But her elevation to greatness might have a more interesting reason.

She has been successful for about five decades, even acclaimed now and then, but the literary establishment began to call her a legend less than 20 years ago, when she was in her 70s. This happens to many artists, and not because they do their best work in old age.

Greatness is not defined by sales figures. It is not a democratic vote. The establishment picks the greats. And establishment writers are usually reluctant to praise their peers. Asked to name the greatest among them, they pick someone who is not one of them.

Sometimes they pick a safe foreigner, or a person from the oppressed classes, but often they pick an old person. This is how Meryl Streep is the world’s “greatest actress” and why many Indian writers would pick R.K. Narayan as “the greatest” and the West came to rate Alice Munro as the world’s best short-story writer.

Munro appeared to see her rise to greatness with a detached amusement. She began writing in her spare time, in between raising her children and running a home. Many writers secretly feel that they are the world’s best ever, even though they may not have had the chance to read every writer.

I get the feeling Munro was not someone who harboured such views about herself. When she spoke of herself, it was with a degree of self-effacement that was very persuasive. From the way she spoke about the process of writing and writing itself, I often got the feeling that she really did not consider literature the most important thing. I could never grasp, though, what mattered the most to her.





What explains new harmful behaviours of India’s rich


2024-05-26

It’s the same baffled look I see in boys anywhere in India who go out on New Year’s Eve to have fun in the Republic of No-Fun. To tell themselves they are enjoying life, they have to get totally drunk, sway, fall, vomit and laugh aloud. It is the same emotion I see in extraordinarily rich young men in India when they are in luxury vehicles their dads got them.

They look like miners of fun. Eventually, all they can do is get drunk and drive at 200km an hour. Now and then, they send pedestrians flying, as it happened a few days ago in Pune, when a drunk 17-year-old rammed his father’s Porsche into a motorcycle, killing a young man and a woman.

Since then, India has been very confused about what to do with the juvenile, first releasing him on bail within 15 hours of the incident, and then, because of public anger, taking him back into remand. The teenager’s father, a builder named Vishal Agarwal who it appears had wilfully given him the car, reportedly tried to flee, but was eventually arrested. Stripped of legal jargon, the man was arrested for being a lousy parent and thus a danger to society. India’s wealthy homes today are filled with this type.

Once, India’s rich had to hide because it was very unsafe to be rich in a poor country. It was a time when the rich were called ‘industrialists.’ That generation of India’s rich had also sponsored idealism out of self-interest to defeat the era’s cultural elite, the British. They either ended up believing these ideals or had to somehow sustain the noble myth.

They knew what being vulgar was, and did not wish to do that. It was hard to hide their wealth, but their displays often had a public context, as with the aplomb of royals. Even today, it is rare to see outrageous behaviour from the children of billionaires. It could be that billionaires are rare, so all incidents involving them appear rare, or it could be that when they do mow down people, that news gets slain.

Granting all this, I still get the feeling that the children of India’s industrialists are briefed well at home to behave well and not kill people with expensive cars. But the ordinary rich are a different lot. I can’t imagine those families telling theirs sons to be aware at all times of their dumb luck and be kind to those who are not as lucky.

You sit with some of India’s wealthy, and all you hear is what money has bought and will buy next. What they have taken from the world, what they will take next. A new generation has been raised listening to this talk and might believe that this is the way to be, this is how the rich should enjoy their luck.

It is my guess that the best thing wealth can buy is an intellectual pursuit. The origin of intellect is in wealth, and it still serves the rich the best. Without an intellectual pursuit, wealth searches desperately to entertain itself with material things, to somehow buy fun that is unattainable for others.

In response to this demand, capitalism has invented many fake products for the super-rich. But the fun just does not come, and like that nun on the bus, they have keep doing more desperate things. They have to buy more and more, consume more and more, and veer towards the dangerous side. Like pushing a Porsche’s pedal to 200kmph on an Indian road.

Garish gluttons of material goods are often mistaken in India as the new rich. This is wrong classification of a group of people that may actually exist in the West.

I do not think there are many newly enriched people in India because that would mean this is a country conducive to rags-to-riches or even middle-class-to-riches. We are not such an equal society.

There could be some exceptions, but we are in essence a rich-to-more-riches nation. Most of the rich we see around us, the winners of capitalism, are beneficiaries of a head-start from previous generations, like Vishal Agarwal, the father of the teen in the Porsche. So what we have is not the new rich, but new behaviour of the rich.

After the Porsche slammed into the bike, the people on the streets thrashed the teenaged driver. We can assume this was not an act of rage on behalf of the victims, but rage at the Porsche.

There is a sociological mystery in the world, especially in India. Why don’t the poor kill us? Why do they tolerate blatant and vulgar inequality? They know the price brackets of cars and how much we order as a single meal on Zomato. There are some obvious and banal reasons why they have not risen in violent ways. Like, for instance, the poor don’t want to be violent.

Also, they do not want to go to jail. But there are some underrated reasons for this peace. One is that all things considered, the poor are probably meaner to the poor than the rich are. The rich not only generate jobs and make sweet but useless art films about the plight of the poor, the affluent sophisticated Indian is the face of goodness in India, the very representation of good intent, social service and activism against the rich.

This perception lies in precarious balance with that other face of the rich—the ominous lightly damaged Porsche on a road.





Why is decision-making a lonely process?


2024-06-02

He was torn between some options and was undecided between a book, podcast or documentary. He had to pick one because only amateurs do too many things at once. A professional has to bet on the best path. Every decision he makes would cost him months, even years, at the expense of other pursuits. Then he said something intriguing. He said he couldn’t decide and there was nobody he could turn to.

“Nobody can help you,” he said. He pointed to his wife who was sitting right next to him. Even she won’t be able to help, he said. She can only listen, take in the facts, but the decision has to be his, and he had been in its throes for weeks. She, as is often the case with wives, was not surprised. She had heard it before and probably agreed.

This is a pleasant successful man with his own tribe of peers who care for him, friends and a loving home. Yet, he is alone when he has to make crucial decisions. That is the nature of decisions.

This is true not only of major decisions. Actually, major decisions have disproportionate grandeur because they are ‘major.’ Most people have to make a major decision very few times in their lives, if ever. I, for instance, have never had to make a ‘major’ decision. I have been seriously wrong about one or two important things, but I did not get there by deciding.

I got there by being certain. I suspect that when people look back at their lives, some of the decisions they once considered ‘major’ may not be major at all. Life is filled with a series of small decisions, some of which can have an outsized impact.

When I set out to write a novel, it was not after a major decision. It was a mere inevitability. But once I began, the first shock was how many decisions I had to make. Should the narration be in first person, what should be the voice, should the lead character do this or that, should bad things happen to the main character, should it all be happy and well? All minor decisions, by the standards of decisions, but some of them turned out to be crucial, not only to a page, or the tone, or the novel, but to my life.

Eventually, opinions on the manuscript came from a friend, agents and professional editors, all voices that attempt to influence a decision. Even considering the quality and intelligence of those opinions and advice, I feel that the actual decision-making process was almost entirely lonely.

You may say that writing is a lonely profession anyway and it is not surprising that such decisions do not involve the company of others. But I see that this is true in all professions, including managerial situations. There appears to be a swarm of advisors, but they are peripheral to the actual decision taken. In the end, decisions are made alone.

Gregarious people, or normal people who have a circle of friends and family, may find this confusing. They have a community and accept that some people are very important to them. So it appears logical to seek the advice of those who matter to them when they must make decisions.

But it never helps. An odd thing about human relations is that odd combinations are forced upon them. For instance, parents are expected to be coaches and a person we love is expected to get naked with us. Far more absurd is that people who are close to us must be able to make decisions for us.

But people cannot help. This is chiefly because we do not share complete information with anyone. We never say entirely what we want, what we need the most and the hierarchy of values we secretly hold. Yet, most people allow others to make decisions for them. It is an act of love, even an obligation of love.

In 2011, Australian cricketer Greg Chappell released his memoirs, Fierce Focus, which included an account of his disastrous stint as India’s coach. In the book, Chappell presents his view of Sourav Ganguly, the Indian captain at the time: “His problem was common in India, where the cultural upbringing of such young stars had it that parents, teachers, coaches and other mentors, managers and even sponsors, would make their decisions for them.”

It is not as though experts can alter the solitary nature of decision-making. But a whole industry of experts has risen to influence decisions. The most harmful thing about a successful person is that he begins to emit advice. Stripped of all the frills, the advice industry has one common theme: a person saying, ‘Why can’t you be like me?’ Experts advise on decision-making itself.

Now and then, a new material arrives in the advice podcast market on how to be a good manager by making “swift decisions,” and I begin to see some people around me suddenly not spending too much time deciding which hotel to book or which airline to take. Other weeks, I see people taking their time, and explaining that being indecisive is smart. I then know that new material has come in that celebrates indecision.

Most people are not trained to be alone physically, therefore they are not trained to be alone mentally. I do feel that almost everyone has a conversation with the self, but very few know how to argue with themselves. And the only way to make decisions is to argue with oneself and be acutely aware of all the forces influencing us, especially the shameful and petty ones.





A theory of why the BJP did poorly in the elections


2024-06-10

He said, “You be careful. See what happened to Kejriwal? He acted too smart, not realizing his size.” A few hours earlier, Delhi chief minister Kejriwal had been arrested on corruption charges.

When the quarrel began, I thought there was something unusual about the moment, because by the laws of probability, it was likely that both men were in the vote base of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). The master is not the average BJP voter, as his wealth and income are well above that level, but a very vocal one in the eyes of migrants. The urban master hides an underrated clue to why the BJP lost 92 of the 303 seats it had won in 2019 (it won new seats to reach 240).

There was a time when the master and the gardener used to do the same things, like vote for the Congress and watch the same Hindi films. There was even a period when their children went to the same school, or at least studied the same text books.

But then, India changed and different classes did not do the same stuff in the same room anymore, unless one was serving. As the BJP rose to assume power at the Centre, different classes once again voted for the same party, and even the same ideology. But this was an odd state of affairs and not fated to last.

Apart from politicians and some paid actors, who are the BJP’s ambassadors? Upper middle-class people in propaganda, journalism, cinema and the culture business., mostly. There are others who are not so prominent but are still ambassadors of the party.

They are among the urban upper classes; they are employers of house-helps, drivers and gardeners. They are mascots of the BJP because they cannot stop talking about how everyone else should be. And they are the worst ambassadors a political party can have.

Intellectuals tend to venerate voters when the results go their way. So it was not surprising that economist Raghuram Rajan complimented the intelligence of the Indian voter for diminishing the BJP. But we can understand elections without the myth of the voter’s pious soul. When we understand what people dislike the most, I think we get most of what they do.

Political observers now say that “hubris” harmed the BJP. In the Indian lexicon, this means arrogance and not self-confidence. In any case, culturally, Indians equate self-confidence with arrogance. But I do not think that professional politicians, even from the BJP, were as overtly arrogant as critics of the party claim.

In fact, for the past several months, they have been exhibiting considerable nervousness. Those who were full of bluster, those who were truly cocky, were actually the sidekicks, like the man in the villa. Millions of average voters who once voted for the BJP saw the cockiness of its most visible ambassadors.

Generally, people do not share the ideology of those they despise. This is the reason why intellectuals find it hard to transmit wisdom. The problem is never that people are too dumb to see wisdom. People dislike wisdom if they dislike the mouth it comes from. It was a phenomenon that at first favoured the right-wing in India. But when the BJP found its own upper-class ambassadors, it probably had an adverse affect on the party’s voter base.

Observers cite several factors that influenced the verdict of these Lok Sabha elections. The most persuasive among these is high food inflation. There are other reasons given by election analysts, like high unemployment among the youth, that I don’t find so convincing.

It is hard to imagine why BJP voters would think some other party would enrich them. This year’s electoral verdict, however, does have a punitive element to it. In the eyes of millions in India, the BJP had probably become a party of sahebs and bullies.

So, when the BJP deployed the political tactic of using law enforcement against inconvenient politicians, it came across as a corroboration of the cockiness of the party’s upper-class sidekicks. And the hard tactics of the previous government de-intellectualized a complex nugget of intellectual wisdom—institutions have to be independent or one man may walk away with everything.

I admired one quality of the previous government in which the BJP had an absolute majority in the Lok Sabha. As a citizen, I felt that someone was in control of the country, and even its future, and that was unprecedented.

Before the previous government, the imprisonment of a politician in India was rare. There was probably a practical reason for that. It was political courtesy. Politicians in power knew that one day they would not be in power and they expected new winners to extend the same courtesy. But there was a time till recently when it appeared that the BJP was not afraid of ever losing power at the Centre. Several rival politicians went to prison.

A diminished BJP may have to conduct more meetings and drink more sugary tea to push its economic agenda, but would also need to be more considerate and tolerant to other views.





The quiet influencers: How the poor have shaped India


2024-06-16

Most of India is hot most of the year, yet most offices and modes of public transport are not air-conditioned. India is not protecting the environment; just that it perceives air-conditioning a luxury, and its unspoken policy is that Indians need not be treated with luxuries. That is how India has trained the poor to think, and this is how the poor have shaped India to treat them.

The first order Modi signed after taking over will give away cash—about ₹20,000 crore to about 100 million farmers. This was probably a way to convey to India’s poor that contrary to what they may have thought, they were his priority.

Indian elections are often the revenge of the poor.

In past years, whenever the educated middle-class grew cynical of democracy, India’s poor have shown their faith in it by turning up to vote. They have forced governments at all levels to be compassionate alms-givers. And this year, the poor intervened again and diminished the might of the ruling party. But this is only the obvious way in which the poor have shaped India.

India’s public character comes from its poor. India is the way it is chiefly because of its poor. Almost every concrete and abstract thing in India is influenced by the poor. India’s elite in every field are deeply influenced, affected and shaped by the poor.

India’s poverty gives Indians a clear moral direction. Every affluent Indian may or may not have a moral compass, but certainly has one for India, and it directs the country to end poverty. How to go about it is at the heart of our economic, social and political debates. Many powerful emotional issues like religion are secondary to the wound of poverty.

People who do not consider this the priority cannot hope for a career in public life. When India wants to invest in technology, it must first make it dreary by invoking the tech’s uses for the poor. This is what India did at the advent of space exploration, the internet and mobile phone—it was all meant for the poor, especially poor farmers, as though India’s poor have no other profession.

Satellites would save farmers from nature; the internet would tell farmers crop prices and mobile phones would save their children in emergencies. Eventually, digital connectivity spread across the country because of entertainment like music, films and porn, but the notion that even the poor want fun does not seem to strike us. We are shaped by the gravitas of poverty. Even when the poor try to tell us that not everything about them is grave all the time, we are unable to fully understand that dimension of life.

The Indian middle-class may not always realize it, but its sense of well-being emerges from the poor, from being privileged in a sea of poverty. Many of them may realize it when they go West and do not feel special anymore. When at home, Indians are so habituated to their privilege that they seem to start believing in the foolish notion that the poor are poor because they are lazy or not smart.

Actually, a typical middle-class person is a great beneficiary of poverty. India may appear to be a very competitive place because of the sheer number of people who turn up for a seat, but the fact is that most Indians do not have a chance at a fair shot. Their role is to make up the vast numbers and make the winners look distinguished.

But look at what happened to the profile of the Indian cricket team when more Indians found the nutrition, opportunity and equipment to train for this sport. The straight-bat middle-class city boys who could speak well at press conferences have vanished. In the same way, the make-up of prestigious colleges has changed. But there are reminders of many things that have not changed. The nation is still rigged in favour of people from affluent homes.

Also, it is very cheap to be middle-class in India because the poor subsidize us all. The poor serve us for almost nothing. They also force the government keep the prices of many basic necessities low.

The price we pay for it is that India treats everyone as though they are poor. India, in plain sight, looks poorer than it really is. If you do not count airports. Some of our airports are so swanky, I am tempted to follow foreign passengers who are visiting India for the first time—just to see the shock on their face when they hit the actual town they came to visit. India assumes that airports are for the rich and that they deserve spaces that are beautiful, while the rest of the nation need not pretend to be aesthetic.

There is not much street joy in our cities because the good life cannot just spill onto the streets. To eat a large meal in public is somehow vulgar. Any sign of affluence in plain sight is vulgar. That is why it is amusing when upper-middle-class people condemn billionaire weddings. Just about any middle-class wedding, or even a typical five-star buffet in India, is an insult of the poor.

India’s civic ugliness does have an unsung social benefit: it does not alienate the poor. Unlike in Europe where the poor live in great contrast to the spectacular urban beauty all around, India’s poor belong more easily in our public spaces. As a result, the affluent almost never interact with public spaces. They live in little islands of private spaces, like zoo animals that own their own zoos.





Why the super-rich and we pay the same for house help


2024-06-23

Like many wealthy people of Indian origin, and some diplomats, they had got house-help from India on pay scales that are generous by Indian standards but illegal in Europe. The prosecution said the Hindujas paid the staff about $8 a day and that their work-days could be as long as 18 hours.

The prosecution also alleged that family had “confiscated” their passports, which is a dramatic way of describing what I gather is a common practice. The accusations are a few years old. They returned to the news after a financial settlement was reached with the staff members but the prosecution pressed criminal charges.

It is likely that the Indian upper class sees all this as excessive because many of them, too, make poor people work for more than 12 hours on less than $8 a day. In their defence, they would say that the cost of living in India is a few times lower than in Europe, so what household staff members are paid in India is not as bad as it sounds.

A prosecutor said that the family had spent almost $10,000 a year on their dog, while paying low wages to their human staff. This could be true even in a typical upper middle-class Indian household. They may want to point out, though they would never do so in public, that do-gooders have a bad habit of comparing how much a family spends on their dog with how much they pay their domestic workers. The comparison is absurd. A dog brings a lot of joy to the family, and is even seen as a part of the family, unlike an employee.

The family did not deny the low pay, but said that the long hours’ part was an exaggeration. They asked, as my neighbours would, that if a house-help watches a film at home with the children, is that work? Maybe it depends on the film in question. Also instructive would be whether the family’s law firm would bill the two hours (or more) its lawyers would take if they watched the same film to ascertain whether the viewing was entertainment or work.

The Hindujas also pointed out that their domestic staff’s compensation was not just the cash they received, but also accommodation and food. That is exactly what my relatives, too, would say. ‘Accommodation’ in an Indian household is usually a room that appears to be purposely impoverished. In my colony, for instance, the default ‘servant quarters’ is a windowless room fit for suitcases.

As a boy growing up in Madras, the most fascinating thing I heard about the world outside was that in the US, garbage cleaners would come in cars to clean the streets. That remains, till date, the most impressive thing I have ever heard about wealth. I eventually realized that the information, in word and spirit, was a bit of an exaggeration. But the idea stuck that the best measure of a nation’s wealth is the standard of living of its poor. Ideally, there should be a similar measure of an individual’s wealth.

“How rich is that guy?”

“Oh, he pays his driver a lakh.”

I really did think in my 20s that was how the world worked.

The rich are willing to talk about how much they spend on cars and carpets and homes. Wouldn’t it be just as interesting to know how much the super-rich spend on their servants?

For some reason, you can get to know a lot of obscure things that the rich spend on, but never what they spend on their staff. That is because most rich people pay only as much as what the middle class pays their household staff.

My colony probably has the per capita income of Switzerland, but it pays domestic workers half of Europe’s minimum wage. I am not lamenting this. After all, I too pay my cleaner ₹5,000 a month for getting into acrobatic positions to clean for an hour every day, and a cook only around the same for working 90 minutes daily on meals.

The rich keep talking about how they subsidize the poor. They do. But it is also a fact that the poor subsidize our lifestyles by supplying labour cheaper than in much of the world. Also, every strata of Indian society subsidizes the lifestyle of the strata above by working for exploitatively low wages. And in the end, we have a situation where Indian billionaires probably pay only as much as I do for domestic work.

No household can be impressive when it comes to the matter of paying its domestic staff. Historically, all the famously humane writers who moved our souls through prose had servants who were probably not paid more than market rates. Merchants and conscience-keepers paid their servants just about the same. Even if some people pay a bit more, it cannot be an impressive sum when spoken out aloud, especially if compared with the incomes of famous humanitarians.

What are the consequence of the Hinduja family case? The wages of migrants won’t rise; instead, wealthy Indian families living abroad may stop taking domestic workers from India, fearing trouble, ending a way of enriching poor Indian families. And wealthy Indian families in the West would have to hire local help, which must be a bit uncomfortable because those workers have such swag and that always diminishes the experience of being a master.





The spectacle of the West is as interesting as it ever was


2024-06-30

The vacation was highly enjoyable, probably because of my company, but I gave primary credit to the concept of leisure travel, and I thought I must travel more and further, and for no better reason than to be elsewhere. But I wouldn’t go on such a vacation for another two years. The first time I took a flight for a vacation was when I was 32. And I am not that old at all.

Since then, I have been on numerous trips. Once, I saw people kayaking and thought it looked fun. I found a kayak, and realized that its seeming fun is entirely a triumph of imagination. It didn’t match the actual experience, like many things in life. Every time I see people having fun, I recall that kayak.

I did enjoy most vacations somewhat, but I never fully understood them. I didn’t consider them “a break” because I don’t understand the concept. A real break, to me, means a break from myself, but I’m always there on my vacations. Also, the idea of going to a beautiful place for a few days only to return to an ugly Indian city seemed pointless. And I never took seriously the idea of going somewhere to breathe fresh air. What’s the point? You always return home.

I have now been to all the continents, including Antarctica (though that was on work). And I am yet to fully see the point of tourism. I do enjoy it, but I can see why ancient people never did it. It is particularly pointless if you are a happy person, so your head is a resort anyway and you do not need to flee your life. But I do enjoy taking a break from India.

Only that motive makes sense to me, even though, these days, no matter where you go, you cannot be free of Indians. I’m in London right now and it is filled with Indian tourists.

I like visiting the West because I enjoy the spectacle of it. Its people think they are Bohemian, but they are so orderly. Even a rebellious hippie follows most civic rules. Watching the West being orderly is like a circus to me.

You just stand on a narrow lane and cars stop to let you pass. That leads to some problems because I tend to just stand on the kerb, with nowhere to go, and this makes cars wait even as I wonder whether I should cross. This really infuriates truck drivers and they honk at me.

Anywhere in the West, I can spend hours just watching cars go in their lanes, especially on bends. They never leave their lane, as though they are orbiting a sacred moral, forever in the gravitational pull of an invisible cultural black hole. I wonder at what per capita income level a society begins to drive in road lanes. Will it ever happen in India, or is it too late?

Over the past 20 years since I first visited the West, I’ve been told that its nations suffer from economic gloom. But I have always found the West filled with street joy. There is laughter and beauty, and if there is no hope, it does not show. As an Indian, I have a very different threshold for what despair means.

London is often described as multicultural, which is not entirely true. Its visible unchanging soul is primarily British and Western. The West may appear to absorb some alien ways, but its fundamental quality is that it does not adapt to another culture.

If it transforms at all, it is because everything transforms over time. The West does not become other people the way we have become other people. We know how the West changed us; but if we ask how we changed the West, we may not find a convincing answer.

The strongest Indian resistance to Western culture is through food. When Indians flock to so-called Indian restaurants abroad, they often have a grimace as they eat because they are usually consuming lousy Indian food at four times the cost. Prices in the West are another spectacle.

It was an even bigger spectacle when India was cheap and I was poor. Entering London was like walking into hyperinflation. It was darkly entertaining, and still is. As an Indian, I have to absorb both local inflation and the rupee’s further depreciation each time I visit.

An odd thing about people who claim to see the point of tourism is that they don’t seem to enjoy it as much as I do. It is easy to see the suffering of many middle-class Indian tourists. As things are, family vacations are fraught with risk because the family moves from a large space to a squished hotel room.

They have to face each other for long hours without respite. One of the unspoken truths about human beings is that most of them cannot take full exposure to family for more than four hours a day. Particularly miserable are families who travel with infants. Without domestic help, they end up toiling on vacation.

And the only person who suffers less than at home is the baby, who will not remember anything. My unsolicited advice to new parents is that they should not waste money on a foreign holiday unless their child develops memory space.

Over the past 20 years, the Indian tourist has become somewhat more comfortable dealing with people of the West, especially the swag of the Western underclass. Still, many Indians visiting the West seem suffocated by all the order and quality and need to behave themselves at all times. I get the feeling that Indians visit Indian restaurants partly to scream at Indian waiters, as some kind of cultural relief.





Why human health is more than a behaviour problem


2024-07-14

American tech billionaires are trying to make death obsolete. After all, death is nature’s technology, and the fate of all tech is to become obsolete one day. I would never mock them because I have great hope in the self-interest of rich people.

Their desire to live forever, or at least for very long, has made the health of all humans, even those who are not millionaires, the emotional goal of modern science; everything else is just business. Not surprisingly, the hype of this decade, AI, is at the core of most attempts.

A few days ago, the founder of Huffington Post, Arianna Huffington, and the CEO of OpenAI, Sam Altman, announced a venture that they say will solve one of the biggest practical problems in health today, which is that most advice is too general to be relevant to an individual.

Their Thrive Ai Health plans to change the behaviour of people by giving information that is highly specific to the person who is using the app. “AI, by using the power of hyper-personalization, can significantly improve these behaviours,” they wrote in an essay in Time magazine.

They make two assumptions. One is that people want to be healthy. The second is that people give truthful information about themselves to an app, in private. It may seem obvious that both these assumptions are correct, but humans are so twisted that they may not be right.

For instance, people lie about their diet even on surveys that do not ask for their identity, probably because they find truths about themselves unpleasant. This, according to longevity specialist Peter Attia, is a reason why he does not take most diet research seriously.

The other assumption, that people want to be healthy, has a layer of truth, but it does not matter. What people want often has nothing to do with what they actually do because what they do is subject to a secret hierarchy of things that they hold dear. People want to be healthy, but what they want more is to eat tasty food, three times a day, every day of the week.

Huffington and Altman assume that the reason most people are unhealthy is that they are unable to change their behaviour, and that is because they don’t have good information about themselves.

While it is true that most health advice is general, it is also true that general advice is mostly good. Stay away from sugar, exercise, be active and don’t be a glutton. There’s nothing in this that can harm anybody, and it has nothing that will not do some good to most people. Yet, most people are not able to change their behaviour, and this is not because an app didn’t send a notification asking them to avoid that third bottle of soda. They are in the grip of human nature.

What is the true nature of people? The question is an obsession with Western anthropology, and the answers are usually qualities that people do not exhibit. There is a lot of talk about “hunting” and “gathering.” “Picking berries,” figures a lot. But then the greatest evidence of what people really are lies in how they are, how they exist. Not in what they stop doing the moment they get a chance.

The reason most people are unhealthy is that it’s hard work to go against human nature, and against an evolutionary drawback—that we evolved for scarcity. To live in plenty and behave as though there is scarcity is to be a philosopher. This is impossible for most people.

The solution to the global pandemic of poor health is something that’s kinder than asking people to change. It’s a pill.

Or some other form of drug. A direct medical intervention is the true equalizer that can help most people achieve what is possible only for some. On this, science does not offer any immediate hope.

Science, in fact, is the most overrated of human pursuits. Medicine, especially, has been a big failure. It is true that modern medicine has increased the quality of information and debunked many of its own myths, and ensured that billions of babies have lived, but its greatest achievements concern prolonging death and not prolonging life.

People are living much longer, but they are not living with the zest of their ancestors. People are living in a manner that is exactly the wrong way to die. Personally, I would rather leap off a cliff heroically than live the way most people in this world live.

This will not be changed by an app that uses spurious personal data to ask people to go against their will and do difficult things like eat bland food, swim or lift weights. The only way most people will live healthy old ages is if there is a pill that not only prolongs their death, but also their youth.

There is another reason why medicine has disappointed, and this is an unsung reason. Parents have become kinder to children and they are given freedoms to avoid dreary career paths, like hard sciences.

Just as the sciences once stole our school geniuses from the arts, then technology stole them from the sciences, something else is stealing them from both tech and sciences. If geniuses are not forced to toil in dreary scientific careers early in their lives, we are in trouble.

But then, there might be compensation in the form of AI. Through its brute ability to make numerous permutations and combinations, hundreds of labs across the world are searching for a way to help people live the wrong way, yet die the right way.





India’s Olympic Games shame is not about sports at all


2024-07-21

But at the summer edition, India will be exposed. We may win some medals, but they would be very few, and most of our embarrassments come when our achievements are measured against a population of over a billion. But India’s sporting mediocrity should not be what shames us. It’s something else.

In any case, Indians have devised a way to handle shame—it’s a relatively new form of expressing shame, which does not look like shame at all. It is a hysterical sense of pride at any Indian triumph. And so it will probably happen again as some Indians win some medals and the nation goes berserk.

Humans exempt emotions from analysis because if emotions are analysed, we would find it very hard to be emotional. If you look at what the country’s contribution is to the success of an Indian athlete, it would be even more embarrassing than our medal tally.

India used to treat its finest athletes very poorly. In fact, during state-level tournaments, they used to be put up in parked railway coaches. Now there is some improvement in the training conditions of national-level athletes, but if you look at the lowest rungs of Indian sports, from where future athletes emerge, the conditions are horrible.

You ask any parent of any social class whose child has some kind of sporting talent in any of the Olympic disciplines, you will hear stories of how poorly competitions are organized, how filthy and unsafe the facilities are. Children are made to wait for hours in the sun as officials arrive late.

A few weeks ago, there were state-level under-15 swimming events in Gurgaon—in outdoor pools while temperatures soared to 45° Celsius. It takes only some humaneness and not even organizational competence to host such events in cooler months or build indoor pools. India is not so poor anymore, but it treats its citizens as though they are poor. It’s extraordinary that not many children die during such sporting events.

That is why I say that the very existence of Indian athletes of global calibre is not because of India, but in spite of India. The shirts of Indian athletes should not say ‘India’ but ‘Despite India.’ And the most thrilling aspect of Indian athletes who triumph at the Olympics is that they are so exceptional that despite everything India threw at them, they reached so far.

Members of the middle class usually opt out of this sporting torment and instead become consumers of national pride through the efforts of poorer people. Like they employ drivers and gardeners, they also employ the poor to overcome the realities of India and somehow triumph against other nations.

The Olympics is filled with farce. For instance, the amusing anthems of nations, which are usually mediocre hyperbolic songs written by poets close to the establishment that claim exactly what those nations are not. But the games do reveal a great truth—how undeserving India is of sporting glory. Even so, the lack of sporting prowess is not our real shame.

The pride of most nations at the Olympics is misplaced. By one measure, the US and a few other Western countries have a hand in most of the medals won by other nations, including China. Because in most disciplines, serious athletes have a shot at excellence only if they are trained by ‘foreign’ coaches, which usually means Western coaches, using Western systems.

So the Olympics are in reality a triumph of the West and how the world has surrendered to a way of life where the West holds all the cards. The West partly finances its sporting excellence through its economic might, by becoming a beacon for legal and illegal migrants. How then can the Olympics medal tally be a measure of national pride?

What should credibly and convincingly shame India is that India is still not advanced enough to host the games. Now that is very relevant to our lives because hosting the Olympics is also a measure of how liveable the host city is.

The International Olympic Council has specific requirements—the host city should have about 40,000 hotel rooms of varying degrees of high quality, and high-quality roads and public transportation, and international-grade sporting venues. No Indian city qualifies, even though India has been making noises about bidding to host the Olympics. The only city that could come close is Delhi and even that seems like an outside chance.

The biggest sporting spectacle we hosted was the Commonwealth Games in Delhi in 2010. Indian sports officials were accused of embezzling crores, the venues were not ready until very late, the chief executive of the games federation, Mike Hooper, said that the Games Village was filthy and unfit for humans.

An Indian games official defended the country by saying that Indians and the West had different hygiene standards. Also, the ceiling of a stadium collapsed. India spent billions of dollars to buy prestige but ended up exposing its true nature to the world.

The fact is that no part of India qualifies to make a serious bid for the Olympics. It should be a reminder that we live in conditions that are among the worst in the world. The way India treats us, it is as though we are all athletes.





Kamala Harris inspires us but don’t ask us to explain


2024-07-28

Three kinds of people will extol her because they would misunderstand her as a beacon of hope and pride. The most obvious would be Indians who would celebrate once again the notion that she is of ‘Indian origin’ because her mother was from Tamil Nadu.

The celebration of foreigners of ‘Indian origin’ is among the silliest things Indians do. It is as though the Indian links of successful foreigners somehow demonstrates that Indians have respectable genes.

But there is a more erroneous idea that Harris inspires and it is more sophisticated than the absurd pride of Indians in foreigners who look a bit like them. There is a broad consensus in America that the Indian community succeeds in America because of something that Indians do in an Indian way, something abstractly but innately Indian.

Americans of ‘Indian origin’ like this view. They use their general success to subtly and bluntly admonish African-Americans and other communities and tell them that the secret of success in America is very simply valiant human virtues. This is nonsense.

Indians appear to do well compared to other communities because the first wave of Indian migrants were the social and economic upper class back home. They were the Caucasians of their native lands. In fact, they could migrate to the US precisely because they were a part of the elite.

It was an extension of their privileges. In fact, by virtue of being born in the right homes, they had a head-start not only against most Indians, but also most Americans. This is what they never tell African-Americans.

Some Indians in America may point out that they emerged from what they claim are “humble backgrounds.” For instance, the CEO of Alphabet, which owns Google, Sundar Pichai has said, “My father spent the equivalent of a year’s salary on my plane ticket to the US so I could attend Stanford. It was my first time ever on a plane. Without all that, I wouldn’t be here today.”

This, in fact, shows that he probably belonged to the top 1% of Indians at the time. Around the time Pichai took his first flight, Indians were so poor that if a man’s yearly salary was as much as a plane ticket to the US, he was in a position to favour his children in ways a majority of Indians could not. And that head-start is not a trivial thing.

The mother of Kamala Harris, Shyamala, too, though not royalty, was a beneficiary of belonging to the upper class in a poor country—a fortune that helped her migrate, legally.

When Donald Trump was president, he opened a broadside against migrants in America. His concern was entirely the poor among migrants. His actions created a moral counterforce, and influential people of ‘Indian origin,’ including Kamala Harris, spoke against his policies.

They gave the impression that migrants were a single collective block of an identical class. But in reality, they had more in common with privileged Americans than the poor migrants who smuggle themselves into America.

The third group of people who may see a bit too much in Harris are women. But then, the success of Kamala Harris is not an indicator that the time has come for women to have a fair chance at success.

She is a sign of something more pedestrian, which is that upper-class women have greater opportunities today to trounce upper-class men. The fact that women identify with her because she is a woman will make no difference in a world where the odds are stacked against most women.

A few hours before I began writing this column, during the filming of the Olympic torch relay, Salma Hayek did a good cartwheel. She did it exactly like the little girls in my park. She is 57. And that may have brought a flutter to the hearts of many 57-year-olds, even though they can barely run up a flight of steps and they know they are never going to do a cartwheel in their lives.

Hayek demonstrates that there are things you can do at 57 if you live the right way. But that is not going to happen to most people. They felt a flutter because they identified with her age, that is all. There is something human about identifying with someone in a similar circumstance. It is human, but also absurd.

The fact that Salma Hayek can do something at 57 portents absolutely nothing for millions of 57-year-olds in the world. Similarly, what some fortunate women like Kamala Harris can do portents nothing for most women in the world. Unlucky women have more in common with unlucky men.

A more meaningful inspiration for women across the world are female athletes from nations like India, where they face enormous odds in their formative years. They are jeered at by their families, communities and even coaches. India gives them almost nothing; India is in fact their adversity. Yet, they are so innately talented that they triumph.

I wish I could say that the lesson here is that if you are a very talented girl in an objective field, even India cannot stop you. But the real lesson, instead, is that for the poor to triumph, first the field should be beyond the interest or capabilities of the upper class, like sports.

And second, men should not be in the fray. That would make the conditions ripe for true social justice to occur. Otherwise, it is just the 98th percentile beating the 99th, and calling it storming the bastion.





‘Baby Reindeer’ banks on the new compassion for frail men


2024-08-04

Netflix has told us right at the start that it is “a captivating true story.” All this actually happened, according to the writer and creator of the show, Richard Gadd, who also plays the lead, but as Donny Dunn.

So, early into the drama, things are already very tense because you believe there was such a man and there was such a woman, who is called Martha in the show, and that she grew obsessed with him and sent him hundreds of emails and thousands of messages, and eventually did worse.

Baby Reindeer, I could tell, counted on me to feel for the man. But, at first and very often later, I was moved more by Martha, a woman filled with fierce love in a world that just could not love her back. Yes, Martha is a menacing stalker, but I wanted Donny to be made of sterner stuff.

That’s what my world would expect of me as a man, and I expected that of Donny. But then, the gambit of the show had worked. Millions of people felt strongly for Donny. No other way could the show have been the big hit it has been, especially in the West.

And it occurred to me how modern such sympathy is for fragile men. And this is where modernity is headed: towards a deeper compassion for men in situations that are traditionally terrifying for women.

But then, I come from a country where the bar for misery is so high that I could only see how lucky he was. He was playing the role of a bad comedian doomed to fail, a loser who had no hope, but in my eyes, he appeared to have a very good life in the heart of London. His lifestyle would probably put him in the top 1% of India.

He even had a lovely ex-girlfriend who let him stay in her mother’s flat. Forget me, imagine a Palestinian watching the show (somehow); you think he is going to feel sorry for Donny? To feel the trauma of Donny, your humanity is not as important as the per capital income of your nation.

In Britain, where Baby Reindeer is set, a writer can assume there will be no contempt for a weak man who is being destroyed by the attention of a resolute woman.

But maybe the writer, Gadd, sensed that there would be some emotional dinosaurs even in the West who would need something more powerful to feel for the man. So he escalates his trauma, or what he seems to consider trauma.

In a lonely alley, Martha pushes Donny against the wall and grabs his crotch. He freezes, shocked. He feels humiliated, and walks away. He is actually shattered. The show is from a world and for a world where there is no distinction between what happens to women and men.

In the more antiquated world all around, it is not easy to comprehend how an adult hero can be molested by a woman and ruined by the experience.

Consider this moment in Larry David’s series, Curb Your Enthusiasm. There is a young man who has claimed that when he was 17, a beautiful 37-year-old actress had “taken advantage of” him. “That’s the trauma?” jeers David, accusing him of being a fraud.

Donny, as though fearing the gaze of the ancient among us, explains why he feels so traumatized. Before Martha stormed into his life, a man had taken advantage of him. A successful TV writer who had befriended him and promised to take his career far, had plied him with drugs and assaulted him. Donny says that the event decisively propelled him towards homosexuality.

Psychoanalysis is a modern thing, though not as modern as compassion for men assailed by women. You would never encounter psychoanalysis in the great epics, or Shakespeare, or even in the classics of Dickens’ times.

But after Sigmund Freud promoted the idea that things can be hidden not only in chests and lockers but also inside your head, and that they can be found, there was a revolution in reading the mind, most of it as spurious as reading the palm.

But another trait of modern compassion is that a man is granted the right to interpret his frailty and feelings, and his whole personality, as effects of powerful causes. In the modern world, no one questions anyone’s trauma.

So the person who finally does is from a more familiar world—Fiona Harvey, who says the character Martha is based on her. She appeared on Piers Morgan’s show and said that the writer Richard Gadd has made up the whole thing, and that he may not have been sexually assaulted at all, that it was probably “conceived in his mind.”

She denied that she ever stalked him to the extent he claimed; that she sent him only “a handful” of emails and very few messages. And that she never assaulted his transgender lover, as shown in the show. She suggested that she may have shown some interest in Gadd, but he made up the horror of it all. She has sued Netflix, claiming about $170 million in damages.

Gadd has since named Harvey as his stalker, claiming that she “often attempted to touch me in inappropriate (and sometimes sexual) ways.” He has also said that his work is a “fictionalized retelling of my emotional journey through several extremely traumatic real experiences.” Yet, it is promoted as a true story. In a true story, how a story is told can be dramatized, but key events can’t be made up.

The identity of the woman who Gadd felt stalked by is out, but Gadd has not revealed the name of the man who assaulted him. That is odd, because the defining quality of our modern times is that even men can reveal their rapists.





Why there’s a clash over classifying an athlete as female


2024-08-11

The people who run global sports and those who frame mainstream decency have since defended Khelif vehemently. As far as the Olympics are concerned, Khelif is a woman because she says she is one and her passport says so.

On her part, she has never revealed details that can put the matter to rest. For instance, if she has XX chromosomes, there can be no further argument.

Almost all humans have 46 chromosomes in every cell and they exist as 23 pairs. The 23rd pair is of sex chromosomes. Depending on your age, you may or may not have learnt in school that a woman is considered a person whose 23rd pairing of sex chromosomes are XX and a man is one whose are XY. But this is not the scientific opinion anymore.

For clarity, I will refer to humans who have XX pairing as ‘XX’ and those with XY pairing as ‘XY.’ This is how things stand today: All men are XY but not all XY are men; and all XX are women but not all women are XX.

This means there are XY women. They have many attributes of most women, even reproductive structures. Also, they consider themselves women. But their condition may give them high testosterone levels that are in the range observed in men.

Testosterone greatly contributes to muscle size and strength, and create other features that help in sports. How much the hormone contributes to sporting prowess and in which sport is a matter of debate, but there is no doubt that its high level is useful.

So there has for long been a debate around whether women who have XY chromosomes should be allowed to compete against ‘normal’ women. There are powerful arguments on both sides.

A sporting contest is primarily a measure of physical inequalities. When seen that way, all great sporting geniuses are physical freaks. Why shouldn’t the Y chromosome in a woman and her high testosterone be considered ingredients of genius?

Sports are also a measure of economic disparity. The boxer who surrendered to Khelif was from Italy, which is many times richer than Algeria, where Khelif was raised by a family of modest means. Who is to tell which is a greater unfair advantage—the backing of an advanced European nation or a Y-chromosome?

The Olympics are also a moral festival. The International Olympic Committee (IOC) gives precedence to freedom of participation and the framing of the world as a decent place that does not discriminate based on who you are.

In any case, the IOC has tried hard to be fair to XX women, those who are widely considered ‘normal women.’ For instance, it requires XY women to have low testosterone levels or to medicate themselves to bring down those levels.

But women with XX chromosomes do not have a cap on testosterone levels. However, I don’t think the world knows of a single XX woman who has male-range testosterone levels.

Also, in aquatics, apart from requiring XY women to have low testosterone, transgenders who went through puberty as males are not allowed to compete. So, it is not as though the IOC has not tried hard to be fair to XX women.

There are equally powerful arguments against the decency of the Olympics, why it is important to define women, and why the world should stop pretending that there is no such thing as a ‘normal woman.’ In pursuit of decency, the mainstream tends to go overboard in denying normality, ending up putting a majority at a disadvantage.

This is happening with XY women. Ten years ago, anecdotally, the biggest champions of transgenders, XY women, or women with differences in sex development, or simply women who didn’t look like women, were ‘normal’ XX women. But now I see a shift.

When a minority grows stronger, easy compassion for them dries up. There can be no moral argument in favour of the view that XY women should not be considered women. Only practical.

For instance, consider the nature of influence. Why are there separate tournaments and grading systems for women in chess? Isn’t that an insult in a mental sport?

But if you have a daughter, you will understand why it makes a lot of sense. The sport’s organizers are trying to create female chess icons and encourage more girls to play. We are inspired by people who look like us, or who are us. Girls are inspired women.

In physical sports, there is already a feeling among gifted XX girls, in their formative years of athleticism, that they don’t stand a chance against women whose chromosomes differ.

In many physical sports, XY women are set to change how future female sporting icons are going to look. This can create a scarcity of ‘normal women’ in some sports.

People can say decent things, and maybe they should, but people do feel a lot of things that may not be decent yet are human nature. And I do believe that XX girls are more inspired by XX women than XY.

On many turfs of women, what creeps in and colonizes are not the ploys of patriarchs, but a certain soft maleness.





India’s Supreme Court is right: Exclude the creamy layer


2024-08-18

A few days ago, India tried to reform an injustice within its social justice programme when a Supreme Court bench said that caste is not a homogenous entity, and that the “creamy layers” of oppressed castes should not be entitled to the same benefits as the poor among them.

One of the judges said, “Putting the children of the parents from the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes who on account of benefit of reservation have reached a high position… and the children of parents doing manual work… in the same category would defeat the Constitutional mandate.”

Across the world, when a disadvantaged community is given special treatment, the elite among them, who might even be better off than the traditional elite, are the first to benefit. It is a way of the world; there are no villains in this. This was, in fact, an argument against political quotas for women.

It is hard to dispute that the way reservations have worked so far is by taking seats from upper castes and giving them to the privileged among oppressed castes.

The government thought about the Supreme Court’s opinion and decided that it does not want to antagonize ‘creamy layers’ of Dalits, which is a term that refers to those who were traditionally oppressed by the Hindu caste system, including “outcastes” who were not assigned any caste. The government may have practical reasons, but its decision is not morally sound.

The Dalit community has its own caste structure, where top Dalit castes treat lower castes poorly. For instance, they don’t inter-marry and some high-castes do not even dine with lower castes. I once met a Dalit activist who had eaten in a Valmiki household in a Gujarat village and was therefore denied entry to a Vankar village.

It appears that victims of evil imitate the same evil to feel that they at least have something going. It is even possible that modern Brahmins have a stronger sense of caste-equality today than some upper sub-castes among Dalits.

The reason why rural Dalits flee to the city is not only to escape the oppression of traditional high castes, but also from other Dalits who consider themselves superior to them. In Mumbai, my maid, who was an Ambedkarite, told me that her community would not mingle with Valmikis.

The poorest Dalits are so choiceless that they often have to perform activities that human beings should not be doing anymore, like cleaning filthy toilets and sewage clog-ups.

Quotas in government institutes and jobs have helped some Dalits who had a good head-start get better off. In some states, a few sub-castes have fared better than others. As a result, there is a lot of resentment at the bottom, from where demands have arisen for sub-categorized quotas.

Reservation will not guarantee employment as jobs are shrinking, says union minister Nitin Gadkari

There have been demands that whole sub-castes of Dalits be given preferential treatment. Reservation within reservation. But then, a sub-caste that is not doing well in Maharashtra might be doing very well in Karnataka. This is a reason why the Supreme Court thought it prudent to consider the economic creamy layer a category in itself exclude it from reservations.

People who oppose this idea are usually privileged Dalits. What they say is that economic progress is not a sign that they are like anyone else. They say they still face social discrimination. Even highly placed civil servants and police officers do.

They may have cracked a difficult exam, but they find it hard to rise. The social contacts that come easy to others don’t come to them. Even so, why should their children benefit at the expense of the children of a man who crawls into manholes for a living?

There could be an argument that being middle class is a fragile condition; one misfortune can push a family into poverty. But then, how would quotas change middle-class fragility? Also, India’s depth of poverty is such that everyone who is lucky has to make way for those who are not.

But there is one sound moral defence for the creamy layer’s contention that they should not be denied quota seats. Social justice occurs not out of the goodness of people, but as a by-product of friction between creamy layers. The second rung hits back at the top rung by demanding moral concessions for all, and then everyone benefits.

Quotas for Dalits too was a battle won for them by their elites. It is time for their elites to let go of the benefits. But then, this departure may result in the elite losing the heart to fight other battles for the community.

They may assimilate into the urban mainstream and increasingly identify less with their caste. The Dalits would then have to groom a new elite that cares for them.

Reservations have helped many Dalits escape poverty, but its effect has been limited in transforming social prestige. To feel lower than others is a form of poverty, and in that, the policy has not helped because of the powerful nature of a banal kind of evil.

The promise of reservations has been that Dalits will be able to break into the clubs of old elites. But then, there are very few clubs that can change destinies. For example, civil services can do that. Maybe to an extent, IITs too, but even their powers are waning.

Clubs are prestigious because they were clubs of the upper class. What ends prestige is equality. The moment a poor Tribal has the means to join a club, it begins to lose its power to transform his destiny. The doors of social life are ajar, but are still held by gatekeepers.





Lessons from Donald Trump’s ‘Hillbilly’ running mate


2024-08-25

Being poor, being truly poor is when your papa is poor, when your “people” are all poor. It is like being ancient in a generation racing towards the future. The mind of the poor is the brooding background in Hillbilly Elegy, the memoir of J.D. Vance, the running mate of Donald Trump.

The book, published in 2016, brought national prominence to Vance, and launched his political career. He draws the portrait of his formative years as a poor White American growing up among those of his kind, people who are called “hillbillies”, and his eventual escape into the American dream through higher education.

He shows a community that is in despair, intoxicated, poor and violent, and holds far less hope for the future than the Hispanic migrants and the Blacks, who are poorer.

The book accuses the hillbillies of blaming their plight on everything outside them, including president Barack Obama, instead of finding a way to exploit one of the greatest nations on earth. Only an insider can say this sort of thing about his tribe, just as only an Obama could have asked America’s Blacks to take some of the blame for their condition.

When the book was released, the Republicans hailed it because it framed the problem of its core base—the White working class that was not doing very well. ‘Donald Trump’ appears only in the afterword, so the book probably never mentioned him in the early editions.

Yet, it tries to solve the political mystery of why poor Whites loved and still love Trump. That was why the Democrats too loved it. Because they saw in it what they wanted to see—that Trump was popular among country wastrels with a twang as they were jealous of the good boys and girls who worked hard and went to college.

Vance came from a poor and unhappy home, headed by an intoxicated, unstable mother, and transient men who tried to take the place of his father. Often, he was a witness to violence at his and in other homes.

He was saved by his grandparents who had done better than their daughter. They became an emotional island that protected Vance from his deadly environment.

The most lethal toxin in the air was negativity, a sense of hopelessness. “Never be like these…losers who think the deck is stacked against them,” his grandmother often told him, “you can do anything you want to.”

Vance talks of the economic fall of the average White family. Extreme poverty was rising. They were becoming more unhealthy, and dying younger. The pride in old-fashioned factory work had vanished, and there was prestige attached to professions that were said to require the mind, and for which one had to go to college.

But the average hillbilly didn’t get sucked into the banal rituals that took one to college. They began to suspect that higher education was rigged against the average White by the “Blacks and liberals”.

Vance blames the hillbillies for what has happened to them. “Our elegy is a sociological one, yes, but it is also about psychology and community and culture and faith.”

He talks about scores of neighbours and friends who never held jobs, who gamed the social security system, who were on drugs and in violent marriages, and their children in the middle of all this who were doomed to fail.

“This was my world: a world of truly irrational behaviour. We spend our way into the poorhouse. We buy giant TVs and iPads…thanks to high-interest credit cards and payday loans…We purchase homes we don’t need…Thrift is inimical to our being. We spend to pretend that we’re upper-class…We don’t study as children, and we don’t make our kids study…We choose not to work when we should be looking for jobs…We’ll get fired for tardiness, or for stealing…But tell ourselves that the reason we’re not working is some perceived unfairness: Obama shut down the coal mines, or all the jobs went to the Chinese.”

Vance is persuasive in his efforts to show that he understands American poverty. Once when Salvation Army gave him a list of gifts to buy for the poor, he found faults with “nearly every suggestion”. Pajamas was on the list.

But, he says, the poor don’t wear pajamas. And “toy guitar” reminded him that in homes with too many people living in too little space, it might be too loud to bring any joy. He found “learning aids” condescending, they made it seem as if the only thing the poor needed was to learn and reform.

Even so, is his memoir compassionate, or is it just a work of a lucky man, who has not revealed the source of luck, who is essentially telling everyone, ‘why can’t you be like me’. In Hillbilly Elegy, Vance implores America’s White poor to be better people, to work harder, and to stop being gluttons of unhealthy things.

There is compassion because Vance says he himself was from a doomed home. He says he worked hard and used the ladders that America placed in its deep holes for people to climb out. But there is a problem with such stories.

The world is filled with people who have worked hard but not got anywhere. That too is the nature of the world. They feel there is something wrong with them because those who succeeded keep extolling their “hard work” but hide the elements of luck. Every escape story has one thing that makes almost all the difference, and it is usually never revealed, as it is almost never hard work.





Nari Hira was a success only Bombay could have given India


2024-09-01

I had just arrived from Madras and Bombay was a foreign land that was years ahead of the India I knew. It had people who could only be found in Bombay, like Nari Hira (1938—2024).

On many mornings, Hira would arrive outside a former seedy hotel that he had converted into the head office of his magazine business, Magna Publishing Company, which included the film gossip and features magazine Stardust.

It was one of the largest selling magazines in India. There were times, surely, when it outsold all other magazines. Hira usually arrived in an old luxury car, possibly a BMW. He was a slim man on whom expensive suits hung well. Given his complexion and manner, I was surprised to learn that his real name was Narendra Hiranandani.

To me, he looked like ‘Nari Hira.’ When he arrived, he always walked fast across the foyer towards a lift, as fast as his poorly paid employees walked at the end of the day to catch a local train.

A distinct character of Bombay was people in a rush. All sorts of people walked very fast to achieve various ends, giving the city the reputation that its people were very busy—which was bogus.

Hira attributed his ability to antagonize film stars to the fact that he was “from South Bombay,” where old money lived, people who did not rate anything that was Indian very highly, including the Hindi film industry, which was based in the suburbs. They were the sort of people who were global and ‘global’ was a local place somewhere in the West.

Their lives were probably an imitation of those led by the cultural elite of New York or London, but we could not tell because we were not exposed to the originals. But the most important thing about Bombay’s ‘global’ crowd was that their source of wealth and their vocations were two different things.

They appeared as though they made their money off their passions, but in reality, their assets sponsored their passions, which helped some of them make more money but most of them just lived off their inheritance.

Hira tracked media trends in New York and replicated them in India. His magazine business was one of them. He also produced films that were meant for video-cassettes, to be delivered to homes.

These were Hindi films that would bypass theatres—and in that way, bypass the need for expensive superstars. I got involved in one of them when he asked me to write a film. Nothing came out of it, but he made me write so many drafts that I think I learnt a lot about how to write a movie.

Hira was a fine example of Bombay’s last gentry, a fellowship of cosmopolitans who were so influential in the media that they conveyed the idea of Bombay being ‘cosmopolitan,’ which was untrue because Bombay was filled with intolerant locals and the poor from various parts of the country who were usually only called ‘migrants.’

The Hindi film industry, too, was monopolized by an old elite, but most of them lived in the suburbs. They were English-speaking. Most film stars read screenplays in the English script (the Latin script), as very few could read the Hindi script (Devnagiri) well.

In comparison, the Tamil film industry had a rustic or small-town air, and so held too many things sacred. The modernity of the Hindi film industry and of Bombay gave the film gossip industry a certain freedom to exist.

For instance, Stardust could run a shocking story about Amitabh Bachchan and thrive because of that; no Tamil magazine could have pulled off a scoop on Rajinikanth and survived. In Hira’s Bombay, there were stars, but no feudal lords.

In its own way, despite all its journalistic flaws, Stardust stood for a glorious age of media when celebrities feared journalism and even had a cautious respect for it.

Film stars, even though some of them boycotted Stardust, needed to appear in the magazine. It would constantly provoke all sorts of people.

I remember once, when the internet was new, it ran a story claiming that some websites featured nude images of women actors, which were actually morphed photographs.

A women’s rights organization protested outside the US embassy, saying that the internet was an American company that was defaming Indian culture. They also tried to storm Magna’s office, and somehow managed to slap its CEO.

The magazine was consequential and some of the most powerful film stars did not know how to tame it—but eventually, they would triumph and Stardust would lose its prominence. The world was changing, and the media was turning servile to stars, which too was a business model. And there was nothing Hira could do about it.

In the war between the city and the village, between global cultural orphans and the local elite, Hira was among the last of the urban gentry before the villagers won. I could get that much, but I didn’t understand many things about this remarkable man.

Once, when he was leaving the country for about two months, he wanted me to live in his house at Breach Candy as a free resident, and caretaker. Thus, from a chawl in Prabhadevi, I was transplanted to a millionaire’s flat in a high-rise with its own garden.

It was a bit like a moment from Harry Potter’s life. A portal opened and I saw something that seemed like magic to me. But the first morning, I realized he had cancelled newspaper delivery.





Why Indian cities may be doomed to remain unliveable


2024-09-08

I did try to point out to him on X that right now Bangalore to Bangalore is two hours. I do not seriously believe he can change my quality of life, but he is the only politician I know who at least gets the fantasy right. And I so enjoy reading his tweets that sometimes I look furtively behind my shoulders to see if I am alone.

Usually, Indian politicians don’t give any hope when they speak of our urban future. They speak of nonsensical things like “smart cities” and “twin cities.” The fact is India’s politicians and people have worked together to make Indian cities among the most unliveable and ugly places on earth.

India is obsessed with the image of its airports. Otherwise, across a vast landscape, India is an urban catastrophe. I believe this will not change. There is no hope. I can think of only two phenomena that convey an accurate representation of modern India.

One is the Olympics and the other is any Indian town. The games expose how poorly run India is and how unkind we must be to each other to fare so poorly even against small nations. Our cities convey the same.

Politicians are blamed a bit too much for what is essentially national character. The political stamina that Indians have for useless issues, if a fraction of that emotion were dedicated to our decrepit civic infrastructure, the lack of parks and beauty, our lives would be instantly richer. But that is not going to happen.

One of the reasons our lives will not improve is that India is unable to change its attitude towards how to treat Indians. India treats all its people as though they are poor. In the administrative subconscious, there is a feeling that this is enough for Indians, they don’t deserve more, they don’t want more.

Just imagine, wherever you are, what are the meetings scheduled in your municipal body today? You think they are going to discuss how to make roads endure, lane discipline, proper medians, working signals and how to make the city aesthetic so that it can serve the well-being of residents?

Traffic is not the greatest enemy of urban life. Many great cities in the world have that problem. Take Bangkok, for example. It has terrible traffic. Even though its efficient metro system makes life somewhat bearable, the fact is that it has very bad traffic, and like in India, its upper middle class prefers car travel despite the jams.

But Thais have such high civic sense and public dignity that Bangkok cannot match the misery of any Indian metro. India has never seriously tried to change the public behaviour of Indians.

India’s most influential people do not seem to believe in the idea of a city. Somehow, they do not appear to crave order or aesthetics or the comfort of ordinary people.

Also, maybe they intuitively feel that the chaos and ugliness of public life also make the poor feel that the country has not left them behind. At any given point of time, visually, India never alienates its poor. Except at fancy airport terminals.

India’s urban mess may also come from what is widely viewed as a political virtue—the fact that modern India was not governed long enough by its cultural elite. There was a lot of democracy very soon.

The elite can be despicable, but they always know how to live well. Every great city in the world has been a beneficiary of the vision of a social elite and the ease with which they could enforce codes of social behaviour.

The fundamentals of modern India too were created by its elite, but they did not prevail long enough to nurture its cities. Some of India’s early leaders did not think cities were important.

Gandhi, for instance, wanted to bet big on villages. He was a famous evangelist of hygiene, but he seemed indifferent to urban planning. He wanted Indian children to learn handicraft even before their formal primary education (an idea that lurked in the first five-year plan).

The failure of the modern Indian elite is more interesting. For centuries, migration was always something that the unfortunate had to do. People fled nature and persecution. But many developing nations endured a new kind of migration where the luckiest people migrated to expand their luck.

For several generations now, the cream of India has migrated abroad or been in migration mode. It is not as though they hold the secret to improving urban life, but what the elite’s migration did was lower their stake in home, and in reforming home.

All successful nations were transformed by their elite. When a society’s luckiest people do not have high stakes in home, we get modern India.

In this phenomenon also lies our only hope. The Indian upper class never fully enjoyed migration. Now India has prospered enough to hold some attraction for the new economic elite, especially those who do not fully feel they belong in the West.

It costs little to act like feudal lords in India and many find living here better than having to endure Western order and culture. So, they may have a growing stake in making Indian cities liveable. They may want safer roads, and, who knows, even parks, clean air and lane discipline.





How unhealthy behaviour could deliver success


2024-09-15

Even in the arts, and other solitary professions, the origin of success is in people who like you and for that reason do not find you very threatening. No matter what your calling is, to find success, you have to be part of a tribe.

For that, you have to meet them often, and for that, you have to go out and eat sugar and deep-fried food and drink ethanol in its various forms, and eat more late in the night, and sleep late, and wake up late.

A prerequisite of modern success is indulging in unhealthy behaviour. This is because a majority of people like unhealthy behaviour, even though they fear death and wish to be healthy. Their joy of life comes from the very things that can kill them. And the friends they like the most are those who live like them.

This is why there is some truth in a saying that has never died on social media, which is attributed to various celebrities: “When you upgrade your life, you lose 90% of your friends.”

It was not always so. There was a time, at least in the West, when people met useful people while walking through the woods.

Every time I read science history, I wait for that part where this young scientist says something to a Nobel laureate, who is impressed, and invites the young scientist for a walk through the woods. If that was still the world, a very different sort of people would have risen to the peaks of their professions.

Even today, some unhealthy behaviour is not required for success. For instance, most ‘networking events’ are useless because nothing that is called networking is ever networking. People of consequence usually do not attend such events. So, most networking events are actually meetings where people who can’t be very useful to one another socialize.

But there is such a thing as networking, and it never appears to be that. Powerful people meet their equals on someone’s sofa, talking about things that do not appear to be work, and seekers who can infiltrate such a network without looking desperate may get somewhere.

But even these meetings usually happen late at night, over drinks and sugar by its many names.

In many professions, the sudden death of someone is accompanied by laments of excessive work pressure. But a bit of this seeming ‘work,’ or even a big part of it, is drinking late into the night with clients or informants. Or even colleagues and friends, which is as professionally rewarding as socializing with people who are useful in more obvious ways.

Former Starbucks CEO Laxman Narasimhan, famously claimed that he didn’t work after six in the evening, or even took work calls except in extraordinary circumstances. A few weeks ago, when he was removed from his post, some people attributed his departure to his outrageously healthy view of life. I think that is a bit of an exaggeration.

Still, a person who is very clear that his family and health is his priority, and who can act to achieve it by declaring that he will not work after 6pm, is a sort of person who would make his bosses nervous. In India, especially, people hang around the office late even if they do no work to impress their bosses.

In European cities, a funny thing happens to people who go for a run very early in the morning. Often, at say 6am, I have run past a crowd spilling out of a pub, people who are still drinking. They avert their eyes. Maybe they are sheepish. Yet, they form a large number of people in the world.

When I see them, I am reminded this is where popular culture is created, this is where future success is created, and where deep friendships are formed. And they have a monopoly over what constitutes socializing.

As the healthy sleep, in other rooms of the world, powerful bonds are forged over conversations and liquor.

One of the strange things about English is that sex is referred to as ‘sleeping’ with someone, while this intense aerobic activity is the exact opposite of sleep. It is an undeserving tribute to the night and an omen that the modern world is designed in such a way that all fun is expected to happen only in unhealthy ways.

As a boy, I was a direct witness to the ways of a previous generation of alcoholic journalists and artists, and I know why the alcoholic male has a lot of friends—he reassures others that he is as doomed as the rest of them. The same principle is what makes your relatives go crazy the moment you choose a very healthy diet.

There is a movement in the United States to popularize a trend of morning parties where larks dance under the influence of fresh juice. I do not expect it to succeed. It is doomed because it is no match for human nature.

I think there is an ideal way to be. This involves absolute health, and for that, one has to sacrifice a bit of success—not all of it, but some of it. Even for this limited success, one has to go out and meet the tribe, and do all the unhealthy things it entails.

Some people do choose never to leave their islands, and for that they make peace with professional failure. But this may not be so healthy. If you don’t find even modest success, you will end up overrating success, which is a nice way of saying you would become bitter.





Nobody told us that Kashmiris are also ‘polarized’


2024-09-22

But that does not mean it is true. It only means that in such societies, the cultural elite and old money still control the media, that the loudest voice belongs to one type of people and the world has heard only their side of the story.

It simply cannot be that anywhere in the world, the elite and others have the same politics, especially over a long period of time. This includes Kashmir, which is in the process of electing an assembly for the first time in 10 years.

Yet, you may think ordinary Kashmiris have the same views as activists who write opinions for foreign media—that they would rather fight India than move on with their lives. This is not true.

Some people who have good lives in or far away from Kashmir, who do not require ‘normalcy,’ may want revolution. But, from what I have seen, most ordinary people of Kashmir just want to move on.

Societies often exist with opposing views. In fact, this is a natural way for any society to be. When we see political change, it means that one side, especially the one which knows words like ‘polarization,’ has lost its power to tell a biased story. For some time now, Kashmir, too, has held contrasting views. We were not told of that.

Over the years, we were told that Kashmiris faced one bad option and a good option. The ‘bad’ option was acceptance of India. The ‘good’ option was ‘freedom,’ by which they either meant freedom from India and alignment with Pakistan, or freedom from India to become an independent sovereign Islamic nation wedged between India, Pakistan and China.

We were told that what Kashmiris really wanted was, miraculously, the same as what much of their elite wanted—freedom from India. This has not been true for some time.

I gather that Kashmiris are very excited about the elections. The voter turnout has been very good. The Indian government claims that this enthusiasm is proof that they are ready and eager to be assimilated into the Indian Union, contrary to what their cultural elites propagate.

Even so, many Kashmiris are disappointed with the Indian government for reinforcing control upon the Valley by abrogating a constitutional provision and ending Kashmir’s statehood.

Both these views mask the real point that Kashmir’s ordinary people have for long tried to make, which is that they are ready to move on. They have been stuck in time for decades as the world moved ahead. While they may not see Indian control as ideal for emotional reasons, it is the most practical outcome.

Twelve years ago, I visited Kashmir during an extraordinary period of peace and optimism there. Eventually, I would write a story for Open magazine entitled, “Sorry, Kashmir is happy.” Most of the people I met were ordinary folk.

In the beginning, they said the usual things about how angry they are with India for everything it did to keep Kashmir in its hold. But eventually, they said that they were tired of Kashmir being a place where there was no economic activity or fun.

They were willing to move on, which was a euphemism for accepting what their parents would call a political defeat. They were ready to accept that India has fared much better than Pakistan, and that a sovereign Islamic nation of Kashmir was not practical. But they pleaded with me not to be identified with this sort of sentiment.

It was not that there was shame in having this view. The shame would be manufactured by people who controlled the local media and had the ear of the Western media, the ones who defamed the idea of calm and normalcy because peace meant India was winning.

After that story, every time violence would break out in Kashmir, some Kashmiri “poets” (of whom there are many) would tell me, with some complex glee, “Look, Kashmir is happy.”

In previous decades, India did try to muzzle the voices of Kashmiri people. But then, so did Kashmir’s own elite. They humiliated anyone who suggested aligning with India made sense.

Like, for instance, Shah Faesal, who in 2009 became the only Kashmiri to be ranked first in the Indian civil services exam. He faced severe abuse on social media.

On his Facebook page, Faesal once said that “…the crop of burger-fed, Armani-attired pseudo-revolutionaries,” referring to long-distance Kashmiri patriots, had “actually harmed” Kashmir.

In troubled places, it is the poor who usually do not have the means to flee and make esoteric suggestions about what must be done to ‘win.’ The people I spoke to in Kashmir wanted the violence to stop, and they wanted the simplest of things.

They wanted a normal life. Cricket tournaments, concerts, and, as one of them said, KFC. When I wrote this, I got sneers from the avocado constituency. One intellectual said I had claimed that what Kashmiris wanted was fried chicken and not freedom.

While this demonstrated reading comprehension problems, a more serious implication in those sneers was the idea that fried chicken, cricket matches and cinema halls were frivolous wishes.

In any system, when an old elite becomes the second rung of a society, they hit back through a moral cause and recruit the poor to fight that battle. When the poor develop practical ideas, they are lampooned by their handlers as fools. That was what was going on in Kashmir.





How could a startup religion succeed in ancient times?


2024-09-29

But what exactly was this influence? It was chiefly science and Buddhism, though Dalrymple’s enjoyable book cites other contributions too. Of these two influences, it is easier to understand how Indian science could have influenced the rest of the world. There is a universality to scientific logic.

For instance, when Arab mathematicians, and the more backward Europeans, were grappling with an unwieldy way of writing numbers, it would have taken them just one glance at the decimal system to recognize its genius.

It is more difficult to get how Buddhism, which began in India, spread across most of Asia and across eras when the hold of entrenched religions was so strong.

I believe that in ancient times, a new religion could survive its infancy because it wasn’t perceived as a faith as such, but as something mystical.

Religious and caste identities were so branded into the souls of people that they weren’t threatened at all by a new philosophical idea. In fact, they barely noticed the religion of foreigners.

Dalrymple points out that when Muslim merchants first arrived in India, they were almost never referred to by their religion, instead they were described by their languages and appearance, as though they were more significant markers.

Their alien faith was not their defining characteristic. People who knew only one religion might have seen any new spiritual or philosophical or humane concept as something outside religion that they could in fact adopt without having to renounce their primary faith.

But there was another factor why Buddhism survived its early stages when it was only known vaguely as “the teachings.” The cultural elite of the time found it fashionable to adopt it. It is likely these elites didn’t think they were abandoning their original faith.

In the India of the 6th century BCE, there was a spiritual explosion. Many charismatic seers sprung up and had extraordinary followings. One of them was Mahavira.

He had a big influence on Siddhartha, who, though often referred to as a prince, was probably the son of a wealthy tribal chieftain. Siddhartha wondered about the meaning of life and set out on a difficult journey of discovery.

He attempted extreme asceticism, which included starving for long periods of time, coming very close to death, and meditating motionless. But then he began to preach the moderate “middle road.”

This idea became popular, especially among the cultural elite, who were his first disciples. Even as they became his followers and evangelists, it is probable that they did not renounce Hinduism. A similar phenomenon occurred in Kerala, where some Brahmins are said to have become Christian.

Today, many of Kerala’s upper-class Christian overtly or discreetly believe they have Brahmin ancestry. The scale of this conversion may not be true, but there is good evidence to suggest that at least some Brahmins did become Christian.

Why would someone at the top of the social order do that? Because he was not really renouncing his faith or caste. Christianity, like Buddhism, was probably a fashionable idea at the time in Kerala.

In Buddha’s era, many sects rose. Historian Abraham Eraly wrote there were probably more than 30, but only Buddhism and Jainism endured. Buddha himself appears to have faded from Indian memory.

If we know him, it is because of his late acolyte, Emperor Ashoka, who created enduring objects that told the story as a part of his evangelism. But then, despite the backing of a great Indian emperor, Buddhism began to fade in India.

No one can explain. The only reason that makes sense to me is that as Buddhism grew strong, it finally became a distinct religion and then Hinduism’s dominance asserted itself.

Dalrymple points out that after Ashoka, “…counter-intuitively, for a faith that embraced poverty and renunciation as an ideal, it was spread around the globe most effectively by wealthy merchants engaged in trade.” This is not counter-intuitive at all.

It is natural that Buddhism would be spread by the economic elite, given its provenance. Is there any successful religion that was not at first promoted by the elite? Or any sphere of human life; even a sport?

After surviving its infancy, the next phase of a new mystical idea depends heavily on how the society’s second rung uses it to challenge the top rung. Buddhism, as a humane religion, could have been the perfect tool of rich middle castes against the priestly class.

But it did not work out that way. It declined in India. But it would thrive in China, first as a mystical idea brought by Indian merchants and monks that aligned well with principles of the entrenched Daoism, and later as a moral weapon of new aristocrats who wanted to replace the religion of a vanquished empire.

Why don’t we see new religions today? Has the time of religion passed? I don’t think that is the case. New religions are all around us, they just don’t look like religion yet. They exist as moral ideas, if not mystical.

Many centuries later, dominant religions would probably involve the fierce adoration of nature, or maybe a theological veneration of socialism. Their seeds are already here. And like Buddhism of a time, they do not appear to threaten any incumbent religion.





The world is in the grip of some fierce delusions


2024-10-06

The film probably triggered a mass googling of ‘Folie à Deux,’ which means ‘madness of two,’ a phenomenon that is more formally known as shared delusion.

So, what was an unspoken flaw in the first Joker is spelt out more clearly in the sequel. The flaw is that it portrays its central character as crazy. Great stories never do that, even though they are all about madness.

The madness of the mad looks like madness; the madness of the ‘sane’ is heroic. And infectious. From the propensity of the world to be infected by what doesn’t look like madness come our enduring abstractions.

Folie à Deux is a phenomenon in which a person with a powerful delusion transfers it to another person, who then begins to see a version of the delusion. The relationship is not equal (assuming that there really are ‘equal’ relationships).

Usually, the person who transmits the delusion (‘the primary’) is severely delusional and the receiver is someone with the potential to receive delusions upon contact with a ‘primary.’

Then, together they believe in the same vision and corroborate it for each other. In the film, the Joker passes on his delusion to a woman who then amplifies it.

Shared delusion is all around us. A person begins to hear voices and a family member then begins to hear the same. A man believes a politician is an incarnation of divinity and someone else, or even the whole family, begins to believe in that. Most instances of shared delusion are so common and ordinary that they are categorized as human nature. Some ideologies, for instance.

There is also ‘folie à plusieurs,’ or the ‘madness of many,’ where a single person infects many. But this too is common; we have to only think of ancient irrational ideas that have endured and still hold sway over the world.

Anyone can see the ‘madness of many,’ except in the case of his own beliefs. Sanity is simply not the majority condition of the world. Mostly, the infection is very mild. But sometimes we get to see how powerful a shared delusion can be.

In 2018, a man in Delhi convinced 11 members of his prosperous household to hang themselves along with him. Until that day, they were known to their neighbours and friends as just a regular family. The dead belonged to a wide age group—there were teens, the young, the middle-aged and a very old woman.

The primary influencer was the head of the family—somehow, he persuaded his family to stand on stools with nooses around their necks and hands bound.

Maybe they were led to believe that if they merely stood this way, they would experience something supernatural after which they could just step down from the stools.

But they would dangle like the veins of a banyan tree, which was the specific stated objective of ‘the primary.’ (Only 10 died by hanging. The old woman probably could not get on a stool, so she was helpfully strangled in another room.) This is a world where it is hard to sell a Netflix subscription. Yet, a man could convince his entire household to hang themselves.

Instances of mass hysteria too may emerge from the same phenomenon, with a single source. Usually, because of the sheer number of people who are infected, which could be in hundreds, the primary source is hard to identify.

As it happened in Haryana in 2017, when hundreds of women across the state believed that someone had chopped their hair when they woke up from sleep or after a blackout.

Joker: Folie à Deux is not only about the shared delusion between a man and a woman, but also his influence on society. A type of people who are primed to receive a convenient or fantastic delusion begin to see what ‘the primary’ sees.

These are probably people in poor mental health, whose condition is made worse by traumas and failures. And they begin to see in a madman a revolutionary. As we can guess from the history of the real world, they are never really saved. They then move on to another delusional hero.

How is it that a vast number of people claim to ‘understand’ a madman? They don’t. They, in fact, misunderstand. Madmen, by nature, are never clear.

They leave enough ambiguity for people to impose their own ideas on another person. And what we are all in love with is our own ideas, even if they are projected on another person.

This is why good scientists almost never become mass heroes, while actors do. There are, of course, some exceptions like Albert Einstein, but he was rare. Scientists are very clear about their ideas, so there is very little room for misinterpretation.

On the other hand, many superstar actors, including those who are not identified as actors, are fluid. They are not what people think they are. This is not a deceit. It is just the way they are; that is their real talent.

People see what they want to see in them. It appears that even when ‘the primary’ is not delusional, he can transmit a delusion to a wide range of people.

In comparison, sanity has no influence. The world does make it look as though its beliefs have come from deep debate, that we took all arguments into account and weighed each angle to arrive at our beliefs, In fact, the inverse is true. People believe what they want to believe and then look for proof. Often, they find it in a person who says ambiguous things.

The world has always been in the fierce grip of the madness of two. Most of the world’s Jokers are revered.





Why Indians who didn’t know Ratan Tata liked him


2024-10-13

Their coolness comes from a lack of desperation, the near absence of predators and the fact that they probably never had to endure anything that could make them bitter about human beings.

Very few people knew him well, and he could well be a man who had a Hindi calendar at home, but in the public myth of him, he was among the last of a generation of Indians who were at once refined and loveable. In him was the best defence of the old elite and the assertion that there is such a thing as class, which cannot be bought with money.

It helped that he looked affluent, and his first language, the language that makes a smart person sound smart, was also the language he was required to speak in—English. Also, he truly loved dogs.

I never met him, even though he took me to court once.

I have seen him, though. Once on the road, in Mumbai’s Cuff Parade area. He was at the wheel of an Indigo, a car that one of his many companies made.

He looked particularly wealthy inside that ‘affordable’ car. It was a scene that would make Indians pass that nonsensical national compliment—“such a humble man.”

I also used to see him on occasion at Thai Pavilion in The President. He did seem to go about life without much fuss.

He lived in an unassuming house that we imagine might have been tastefully done with some fantastically expensive thing or two. But from all accounts, his life was austere in a way only a refined rich man’s can be.

Austerity is possible only when one is able to afford everything it rejects. And what it rejects is most of the useless products that capitalism creates for the super-rich.

The meaning of class is that it recognizes life is not about consuming, and money is not about showing itself. About this world-view, he has spoken a bit.

Class has lost its allure in India. It is probably tolerated only in old people anymore. Today, those who don’t have either money or class aspire to money, almost never to class. In fact, class is a passionate pursuit only of those don’t have a lot of money.

There was a point when the wealthiest people of India began to flaunt their wealth very openly. It was suddenly safe to do that. As a result, some giant billionaire silos sprang up in Mumbai.

Intellectuals said that these houses were vulgar because they were like taunts to the poor. But the truth is that for a majority of people, these giant billionaire homes are beacons of hope.

People today feel that wealth is attainable, but class is something you are born into. But the fact is that in India it is easier to attain class, just by living well or through intellectual pursuits, than to amass wealth, which is a by-product of a system that is more rigged than class.

But this is not the general perception of new Indians. In any case, they care very little for class, their own class. Their new heroes are billionaires. Yet, what they like about Ratan Tata is not just his money, but that abstract halo of refinement.

Ratan Tata lived through the modern evolution of class in India.

He assumed power when it was still very expensive to be rich, by which I mean that an affluent lifestyle was affordable only to the truly wealthy. It was the golden age of the rich. They never had to stand in line for anything; there were very few of them.

At that time, the middle class was closer to the poor than to the rich. We did a lot of things that the poor did and we shared many rooms in many places with the poor, and we almost never met the super-rich. It was a time when class and wealth were the same thing. People who had class automatically seemed to have wealth.

Ratan Tata, as a wealthy Parsi, had liberal views. He appeared ‘Western.’ It is a way of speaking, chiefly saying humane things, and living true to what you said. It is rare to see that world-view in India among those who are new to great wealth.

Even when Tata acquired the revered British brands Corus, Tetley Tea and Jaguar, he did it without any nationalistic swag, unlike the Indian media, which reported the acquisitions in a hysterical way.

His personality made Indians make allowances for him. Once he told The Times (of London), “In my experience, in both Corus and Jaguar-Land Rover (JLR) nobody is willing to go the extra mile.”

He said it was “a work-ethic issue” of the British. He said Indians, in contrast, worked hard. “I feel if you have come from Bombay to have a meeting and the meeting goes till 6pm, I would expect that you won’t at 5 o’clock say, ‘Sorry, I have my train to catch. I have to go home.’

Friday from 3.30pm you can’t find anybody in their office….” Further, he observed, “The entire engineering group at JLR would be empty on Friday evening, and you have got delays in product introduction…”

There was an uproar in the UK over what Ratan Tata said, but Indians were not offended that to a titan of Indian industry work ethic meant workers putting in long hours.

It was a concession that Indians on social media did not extend to N.R. Narayana Murthy after he said that young people should work at least 70 hours a week.

There were a bit more serious things Ratan Tata could say and do, yet emerge unscathed.





The spectacle of SpaceX’s rocket catch is how science has failed


2024-10-20

A few days ago, the world appeared to have the same look when Elon Musk’s company SpaceX managed to grab a descending booster with giant pliers. I don’t know why the world reacted the way it did to the event. We have seen more marvellous things.

I just don’t get the greatness of the booster catch. The hype was similar to the time when Musk launched his red car into space and his fans were blown, as though they had not heard of an object called a satellite that could be put to better uses than an orbiting Tesla.

I do not say that capturing a rocket booster is no scientific achievement. I just say that in 2024, it is no marvel. And that it is perceived as a marvel points to a problem.

Rocket science has always had more allure than its technological substance deserved. Even in its glory days, there were sciences that required greater human brilliance than shooting off metal to space. The phrase that actually captures the meaning of “it’s no rocket science” is probably, “it’s no malaria cure.”

But it just does not sound as cool. Even the word ‘ballistic’ carries disproportionate scientific sophistication, though it merely describes gravity. (A ‘ballistic missile’ has an unguided descent while a ‘cruise missile,’ which sounds more recreational, is guided till the very end.)

The booster that Space X grabbed on its descent was about 70 metres long, or as large as a 20-storey building. The booster slowed itself down from its initial supersonic speeds before it was clutched. Boosters usually just fall into the sea.

But if they can be reused, it would significantly lower the cost of space missions. If that is the most exciting part of the booster-grab, then I am especially disappointed as an Indian because we can send a rocket up cheaper than Space X, even if our boosters just fall off.

My quarrel is that, as an innovation, the descent of a booster is not much superior to the ascent of a rocket, especially with a human crew on board that has to be taken to a precise location and brought back.

Also, even in rocketry, a booster grab is far more modest than the performance of Israel’s iron dome, which can intercept hundreds of missiles, including hypersonic ballistic missiles, the kind Iran rained on Israel a few weeks ago. Also, we landed on the Moon in 1969, and did not repeat the feat because it was not worth the expense.

The fact that in 2024 the guided descent of a rocket booster into the waiting hands of an iron structure qualifies as a great scientific spectacle of our times at once reveals and hides the fact that modern science is a big disappointment, especially to its own initial promise.

It’s not that present-day science isn’t impressive at all. For example, modern hacking is ingenious—you receive a phone call, not even answer it, and still end up with a virus that takes over your phone.

Almost everything Israel uses to defend itself is impressive technology, and much of the best warfare science today is beyond public knowledge.

But the achievements of modern science have been modest in furthering our understanding of the nature of reality (considering how much we knew, say, by 1910), and in our quality of life, especially in medical sciences, whose hype comes from their ability to prolong death instead of rejuvenating the human body.

Today, if you wish to live well, science cannot guide you in any specific way. It can only offer a broad direction, not very different from the advice of a wise old woman if you don’t count her attempts to push her high-carb sweets. In 2024, you still have to go through a process of trial and error to figure out what works for you.

Science has stagnated in areas like air travel not because it does not know how to fly you faster. We have the tech to shoot you into space from Delhi and bring you down over New York just about two hours later.

It is just that we have not found a way to do it cheaply enough for commercial application. Even so, the fact that our grandfathers and we travel at the same speed across the world is a failure of science.

Why has science disappointed? There is a defence that incremental breakthroughs in a field get difficult over time. But there is an unsung reason.

Science may have mojo, but scientific research is often tedious, even boring. Across the world, smart young people now have many options for how to lead their lives. Even in India, upper-class parents no longer pressure their children to pursue lucrative unhappy careers.

You don’t have to do something anymore just because you are very good at it; you can follow your ‘passion,’ which is often something in the arts.

As a result, some people who might have been great engineers may be making terrible but honest movies, or those who would have been marvellous biologists might be working on the best way to compress a video file.

You could argue that there are enough people in the world, and even if some opt out of the tedious aspects of science, there are still plenty of others eager to pursue them. However, extraordinary breakthroughs typically come not from systems, but from the ingenious insights of extraordinary individuals.

I worry that the scientist capable of a breakthrough that could vastly improve my quality of life when I’m 90 might be working at SpaceX, figuring out how to catch a rocket booster instead.





Why Kangana Ranaut could be seen as India’s Trump


2024-10-27

A few weeks ago, Ranaut got a legal notice for stating that India’s independence was not real, that it actually got its freedom in 2014 when Narendra Modi took over as Prime Minister. She has also said that the Hindi film industry is run by a small cartel of privileged children.

This is not the sort of thing an actor can say and survive in the industry. She has probably not survived as such, at least the way she could have if she did not speak her mind. But she has become a far bigger public figure by doing just that.

She is India’s Donald Trump, a person who says things others would not. For this reason, her political future is underestimated the way Trump’s was.

Her success in the recent general elections, when she was elected a Member of Parliament for the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party may turn out to be just the start.

Every country has its own Trump. Every profession has its own Trump. And being Trump is about taking a gamble in a world stifled by decorum and saying things nobody else wants to say, which can be rude in a way many truths are.

Trumps were around before the rise of Donald Trump, but they could not succeed as well as him before the age of social media because a cultural elite controlled public opinion.

According to the political theology then, a person had to maintain some sort of decorum to win votes. Trump showed that was a wrong analysis.

Why should loose talk be politically valuable? Aren’t ordinary people decent folks? Trump said horrible things. For instance, he has called people ugly and fat.

What analysts often don’t get is that Trump became popular not because of such statements, but in spite of them. There were other things he said and still says that make people feel he gets them, or is like them.

As his running mate J.D. Vance said in his memoir, there are many Americans who feel left behind by American progress and the face of that nation’s advancement is a swarm of suave highly-educated liberals of many colours, whom Trump roasts.

It really didn’t matter that Trump was a very rich man, even if not as rich as he claimed. Between the rich and the posh, the average voter usually dislikes the posh more.

Ranaut is perhaps more relatable to Indians than Trump is to Americans. People are more likely to spend money on a Karan Johar film than a Kangana Ranaut movie, but if both stood for elections, they are more likely to vote for Ranaut.

Across the world, the rise of the political right has tracked the rise of individuals who have been blunt and politically incorrect. This is so in India too.

Typically, when a politician rises in stature and his base becomes broad, he becomes careful and his articulation becomes part of a practical decorum. That is why decorum exists. Not because the voting masses are inherently decent, but because public figures have to appease all constituencies.

But some politicians find the freedom to say just about anything they want and thrive because of that. By speaking their minds, they primarily offer entertainment. And they often give us insights into the working of the world in a way that only bluntness can.

A few years ago, I interviewed Ranaut on stage for the Times Literature Festival. At the time, she was at the peak of her fame as an actor and enjoyed immense goodwill from all sides, as she was viewed as a person who came from nowhere and made something of her life in an industry where opportunities are often preordained. Also, she was yet to fully reveal her mind.

“I don’t like anything about my job, to be honest,” she told me about acting. “I remind myself the bills that I have to pay.”

The only major controversy surrounding her then was her claim that she had a relationship with Hrithik Roshan, which he denied. But later her attitude to the film industry changed. She said some industry people were working against her.

Often, people acquire strong political views not out of deep conviction, but because those views are the opposite of the values people they despise hold dear. This seems to be the case of many people in the Hindi film industry who went ‘right-wing.’

But none of them were as blunt as Ranaut, who called out giants in her own industry. In 2020, at the height of the covid pandemic, when the actor Sushant Singh Rajput committed suicide, she said it was not a mental health issue and blamed a Bollywood cartel for pushing him to the sidelines.

Those who condemned Ranaut for denying the role of mental health in his suicide were also the sort of people who don’t accept that mental health, and not the government, should be held responsible for the suicides of farmers or Dalit activists.

Before the rise of Ranaut as a politician, the person who came closest to being India’s Trump was Subramanian Swamy, who once said Indians who are not Hindu should not be allowed to vote unless they declare that their ancestors were Hindus.

While the world appears to be filled with loud voices, in reality, it is a silent place where most people cannot say what they want. Even if the world appears to be angry now, most people do not have strong opinions.

They just enjoy the strong opinions of others. Moderates are bores; extremists are fun. Perhaps Ranaut knows that. Politicians are also actors. So, in a way, Kangana Ranaut has never really switched careers.





Gifting isn’t really the noble act it seems to be


2024-11-03

Some cars were piled with gifts and driven by unhappy drivers who would drop them off one by one. All around me, there were gifts going some place that would make people happy—nominal gifts, useless gifts, gifts bought in bulk, lots of sugar, surely, glassware and some silver here and there. These were obligations inching along jammed streets.

Gifting is not a noble act. Or at least not as noble or simple as it appears. It is a force exerted by society to make individuals participate in herd activity.

A collective, any collective, is always contemptuous and fearful of the free individual; in response, it promotes rituals to strengthen bonds and fellowships. All festivals torment the solitary. If nothing, at least in the form of a traffic jam.

Inside the cars, I noticed most people were heroically patient. As if they were in the crush of a religious procession. It was as though they knew this was not commuting, but the concourse of a festival that everyone was part of.

Only the paid drivers were miserable, apart from a few people who did not think bonding with people was worth being stuck in a jam for hours. Here and there, a driver would leave the car to go urinate in full public view.

Gifting is an ancient code. And it is as it always was, something that occurs between peers, between equals. Exactly like envy.

We primarily give gifts to people who do not need them, who have everything. And what must you give people who have everything? Humans have probably wasted much time trying to answer this. Not many have solved it, as we know from personal experience, though we are too polite to say it and people we love are too polite to tell us.

Gifting is also a caste system. People give expensive gifts to rich peers and relatives, and cheaper gifts to poorer friends and relatives. Gifts can broadly tell you what others think of your status.

Some people spend a lot of time trying to find meaningful gifts. They probably fail, but to them the real gift is the time they have spent. Of what use is such wasted time? I would not want people I love, and who love me, to waste time on my behalf trying to get me what I don’t need or what I can buy easily.

My way of loving people is to give their time back to them. But, I know, most people do appreciate the time and effort others put into expressing their love, or their obligation, as is usually the case.

I would not mind at all if you gave me very expensive things that I would not normally buy. But then, they would not be gifts. Gifts, by practical definition, are something you don’t need or need someone else to buy for you. Anything too expensive is actually a form of payment; a fact that is so plain, even the income tax department knows it.

Gifting to people who cannot afford the gift, in reality, is not gifting. It is alms. What is modern about this is that it is called ‘gifting.’ And what we ‘gift’ to the poor is often an instruction to them on how we expect them to live.

We fill the lives of our friends with pretty things, and useless things that will be recycled, but when we have to gift the poor, we buy them stuff that we think they ‘need’— like food. We don’t ‘gift’ them money because we presume they will ‘waste’ it.

People somehow cannot bear the idea of urchins using their money to go watch a movie. Somehow, that is wasteful in a way feeding them cheap burfi is not.

J.D. Vance, Donald Trump’s running mate, in his book Hillbilly Elegy talks about how his experience of poverty made him see through how ridiculous it is when the rich attempt to give gifts to the poor.

Once, when Salvation Army gave him a list of gifts to buy for the poor, he found faults with “nearly every suggestion.” He found ‘learning aids’ condescending, since they made it seem as though the only thing the poor needed was to learn and reform.

About that most common gift—‘pyjamas,’ he says the poor don’t wear pyjamas; they go off to sleep in their jeans or whatever it was they were wearing when they felt sleepy.

As modern people, there is something amateurish about us; we are amateur humans, compared to more feral people. Charity, like compassion, is modern and we are still finding our way through this new behaviour.

When gifting is not confused with charity, when we fully see gifting as a social conduct between equals, we are more sure of ourselves, because it is an ancient act. Every ancient thing we do is a herd activity.

The academic anthropologist Marcel Mauss argued in his famous essay, ‘The Gift: Forms and Functions of Exchange in Archaic Societies,’ that gifting was an ancient practice and not an individual’s action. It was an obligation imposed by the whole clan on individuals.

Mauss has a very affectionate view of gifting partly because in its original state, it had a quality that humanities scholars love—it was not an economic activity.

In olden times, gifts were not “… solely property and wealth, movable and immovable goods, and things economically useful. In particular, such exchanges are acts of politeness: banquets, rituals…”

Now gifting has become an economic activity. But a fundamental quality of gifting still derives from its ancient origin. It is an obligation imposed by the clan.





Why ‘liberals’ are often bad ambassadors of good ideas


2024-11-10

Mostly, they never say anything wrong, but the problem is their sophistication and self-righteousness, and the banal smugness of their view that humans should be moral. I do not know Trump’s constituency well, but Western ‘liberals’ form a monoculture across the world.

They usually speak the same way and of the same things. They probably even got their vanity degrees from the same colleges, and have the same intolerance of any view that deviates from their theology.

From what I have seen of the type in my country, they are the worst ambassadors of human decency, and of that beautiful idea—the strong must protect the weak.

Now that Trump, a man accused of corruption and sexual assault, has prevailed over the liberal campaign, does it mean more than half the American electorate is sick? This is what liberals would have us think.

Or is it that the evangelists of fine human qualities are making those very qualities look bad? This they do not accept. Maybe they don’t see it, like the many other things they do not.

Some of them are annoying for no fault of theirs. When you state some noble things, you inevitably end up irritating people. For instance, beneficiaries of inequality who write angry essays against inequality. (If not the cultural elite, who else will say the right things?)

And, the underemployed young who want to escape the unpleasantness of adulthood by joining collegiate movements to save the world. (But then, what is so great about the bogus jobs of capitalism that the young should not escape them?)

And women from the top 2% of society who say they are discriminated against by the top 1%. (They are.) And anyone who rages against those who do not believe in climate change.

Sermonizing intellectuals can be annoying because what they seem to be saying is that they are better people than the rest. They can be mean, petty and classist in their private dealings, but in public they stand for great causes. They seem to think they have camouflaged their failings.

But people, in reality, have no masks, and what they truly are comes through when they pontificate about those who are not like them, who don’t agree with them, like when they speak of Trump supporters, describing them as ignorant, petty, racist, foolish and mostly male, as though that is a form of evil in itself.

To fully fathom how badly ambassadors of ‘liberalism’ are doing, we need to measure their efforts against the exquisite job done by the few who are extremely good at it.

Barack Obama, for instance. He speaks in a manner that is not superior or contemptuous. Somehow, even when he is sermonizing, it doesn’t appear to be a sermon. He has a rare talent in a field filled with the ungifted.

Typically, average people don’t have strong opinions. Rather, they develop views that are the opposite of the values espoused by people they despise.

This is a reason why, despite everything we’ve heard lately, the US elections revealed that Trump has improved his popularity among not just African-Americans and Hispanics, but also young women voters.

It simply cannot be just the economy and fear of immigrants, as intellectuals ask us to believe. People are drawn to anything ‘liberals’ condemn.

There is now wide acceptance among ‘liberals’ that the ‘wokes’ among them did some damage.

Wokes are, at first glance, hyper-moral people. But I think they are just people who are so far removed from natural goodness that they have to make exaggerated guesses about what being good is, which may be the reason why they do extreme things, like vandalize art to educate us about capitalism or climate change.

But then, a ‘woke’ is not clearly defined. To many, anyone who imparts moral lessons outside religion or other forms of magic, meaning any ‘liberal,’ might seem woke.

Wokes, like medieval zealots, can create powerful sects fast. Climate change, for instance, could not have become a movement based on scientific reasoning alone. It had to first become a kind of religion. The early Elon Musk persona itself is a creation of wokes, who were the first manic devotees of Tesla because it stood for all the right things.

If suave and sanctimonious ‘liberals’ can be poor ambassadors of their ideals, can it be true that Trump supporters are also poor ambassadors of the ‘right-wing’? They are. I am certain Trump fans pushed many undecided voters towards the Democrats.

But they are less annoying than the self-righteous. A typical Trump evangelist, such as Elon Musk or Joe Rogan, usually makes fun of wokes, who are a demonized minority in America. Most people do not identify with what they are ridiculing.

In India, something interesting appears to be going on. Many people are thrilled by Donald Trump’s victory. Among those who identify as right-wing, there seems a sense of satisfaction that a leader of the right has ascended to power in the world’s most powerful country.

But perhaps they will realize in time that there is no such thing as a global ‘right-wing.’ Only the left can be global. The right is always local.





Why national pride has not cleaned up Delhi’s air


2024-11-17

First, a part of Chennai was brought to a halt as an ambulance sped to the airport; then Bangalore halted as another ambulance raced to a hospital. It was as if India dearly wishes Indians to live.

I got the same warm feeling during the pandemic too. That great lockdown, and cops threatening to beat us up for stepping out of the house, and India coming up with its own vaccine. Some days, I do think India wants to take care of us. Then the winter arrives in Delhi. It comes every year and takes the country by surprise.

In many regions of north India, the air quality is not fit for life. Hundreds of thousands of people probably die every year directly or indirectly on account of air pollution. Some schools are shut in the national capital region. People feel choked. And many ask why we cannot solve this problem.

The winter air is a subject of one of the worst arguments I have made as a columnist. Eight winters ago, when the air was poisonous, as it is today, I argued in the Hindustan Times that we have hope.

That nationalism will clean the air. Now, I must withdraw that opinion. If you want to be right about India, you have to say something bad. Being hopeful is perilous for a columnist.

My chief argument then was that the history of other nations should teach us that nationalism always begins with dangerous pride but slowly becomes something more genuine in the form of true love for a nation.

And when that happens, pride is replaced by shame, a national shame for all its flaws. And people then solve their difficult problems. I thought that might happen in India. Our nationalists will be filled with shame and they will clean the air.

At the time of writing this column, the air quality index of Delhi for very tiny particles, the most dangerous sort, is 424. This is as the worst band of AQI. It means that the air can put even perfectly healthy people at risk of developing respirational problems.

I have been waiting for national pride to blossom into national shame. But now I don’t think anything so genuine is going to happen.

Air quality is not a major political issue yet; but the reason why it is so bad in the national capital region is influenced by politics. Some people want to believe the problem is the burning of crop stubble by farmers in Punjab, which is a cheaper and nastier way of getting rid of farm waste.

Others wish not to have fingers pointed at noble farmers, “the hands that feed us” fast carbs, but at vehicular pollution and industries that surround the capital region.

It is bizarre how vulnerable the capital region is to many polluting industries, including factories that make products for pharma majors based in advanced nations.

The latter have set up operations in countries like India not only for comparatively lower costs of production, but undeniably also for less stringent environmental regulations.

These regions often allow higher levels of certain pollutants, which may include pharmaceutical waste, chemical by-products and heavy metals, than would be acceptable in the US and Europe.

I am reminded of what Lawrence Summers wrote in an internal memo, in 1991, when he was the chief economist of the World Bank—that toxic waste from factories should be moved from America to poorer countries because the value of life is cheaper in poor countries.

When the letter got leaked, Summers said he was only joking. Maybe he was joking, but I would go with what my daughter used to say when she was little: “A joke has to be funny.” Even in a joke, people are not always joking. In any case, this is exactly what rich nations are joking about.

I am breathing bad air because I live in a poor country, air that is unfit for Americans and Europeans. Put that way, the shame feels greater. A shame that I wanted engulfing patriots. But that did not happen.

Another argument I had made eight years ago, when I believed that nationalism could clean the air, was based on my observation that the Indian upper-class was digging its heels in here more decisively than ever.

The elite had their best lives here with their families and a social order where respect was easy and the poor ensured almost everything was subsidized for the rich, while life in advanced economies was rough even for an upper-class Indian.

And this decision to stay in India, I thought, would raise the stakes for the elite, and they would find a way to influence politicians to solve the air quality problem. But then I get the feeling now that they feel bad air is just a price they have to pay.

Apart form our lack of shame, there is another reason why we breathe this air. India does not have what it takes to solve difficult problems.

In this case, serious political will must combine with great bureaucratic talent in a person of high integrity who is brilliant and knows how administrative wheels move. In short, an E. Sreedharan, who gave us the splendid Delhi Metro.

To clean the air, we would need many like him. I don’t think that is going to happen.

So we have a situation in north India where life has assumed the quality of an over-the-top satire. Even an exercise routine would be a bad idea because one would breathe more bad air.

And to be a child would be a disadvantage because children breathe twice as much as adults. India may not have shame, but it is always funny.





Why the 5-star hotel experience needs urgent reforms


2024-11-24

Later, when he decides to sleep, he apparently loves finding the blanket so tightly tucked in that he feels like a letter slipping into an envelope. He loves to try and pull up the blanket and fail, as achieving that requires uprooting it from its moorings—an act he can perform only with his legs, which are not strong enough. And thus, he thinks, “I must work on my quads.”

Also, he surely enjoys finding his towels folded into animal shapes. Maybe market surveys revealed this as a key satisfier—why else would hotels do this to you? Even so, I have a very different view of human nature, and on that basis, here are my suggestions on how to reform the five-star hotel experience.

Gag the TV and put out the lights: The first experience of the room should not be the TV. Not only should it be off, it should also be dead. The ever-glowing power lights of the screen and set-top box may seem harmless but can significantly disrupt sleep, especially in a pitch-dark room. And they are not the only things with glowing lights.

A hotel room is often filled with them—on air conditioners, phones, clocks and, of course, smoke alarms. Many rooms have a smoke alarm right above the bed, as though people tend to vaporize—and when that happens, sprinklers should come on. What’s insidious about these small lights is that they never appear to be the reason for your poor sleep, but there’s a good chance they are.

Tell guests the trick to survive tightly tucked beds: I have tried to find out why hotels tuck in the blanket. Like many things in life, people don’t know why they do stuff, and hotels are not sure why they tuck in. There is a view that they do it for aesthetic reasons. What is clear, though, is that they want to do it. As a favour to their guests, they need to do one of two things—or both.

They need to use longer blankets, long enough to fully cover you even if a large portion of it must stay tucked in. Or, if inordinately long blankets are not easy to find, hotels should at least reveal to guests a very simple technique for slipping in smoothly and safely.

The central conflict with a tucked-in blanket is that you cannot pull it over your head—something you may want the freedom to do even if you don’t usually shroud your face. So you need to pull the pillow down, away from the bed-rest. Then, you don’t have to uproot the blanket. That way, both the hotel and you win.

Bring back ceiling fans: It is ridiculous that Indian five-star hotels do not have ceiling fans just because their rooms are air-conditioned. It is a senseless imitation of hotels in cooler countries, where fans are not part of the culture. But ceiling fans are important to Indian guests as they are accustomed to their soothing hum.

Also, the fans help regulate the temperature without over-relying on air conditioning and in that way save energy. Fans also hide other noises, more disturbing noises. Guests who dislike them can always turn them off.

Simplify switches: An elaborate ritual in hotel rooms often involves figuring out how to turn off all lights. Even if there’s a master switch, a mysterious floor light or corridor glow will defiantly persist. These lights seem deliberately elusive, hidden in obscure corners as if they are shameful secrets. The designers, in their quest for cleverness, ensure these switches are impossible to find, especially when you’re half-asleep.

At times, it feels like the hotel room competes with your sleep, finding subtle ways to disrupt it. Wardrobes, if not firmly shut, emit light. And even if you conquer all sources of illumination, you’re greeted by the glowing stars of power buttons on TVs or smoke alarms. All this degrades the quality of rest.

Accept that music is sound: There’s something about a hotel corridor that makes most people think they are alone even while passing dozens of shut doors. I have heard all sorts of things from people passing by. The corridor offers a completely false sense of privacy.

I’m not saying this because I care for your welfare, but because I want you, when you are staying in my hotel, to keep shut, especially at night. I have been woken up too many times by happy people, some of whom have been the hotel’s own staff. Instead of promoting themselves on the TV screen inside, hotels should promote the idea of silence in corridors.

Hotels also seem to think that music is okay everywhere. In corridors, cafés, lifts and more. Music is generally a human wind instrument collaborating with a very bad poet and producing sounds that are supposed to create a mood. I know that most people are alright with it, and I enjoy some of these collaborations myself, but it is also one of the great pollutions of modern life.

I don’t need music all the time; I don’t need my mood to be set constantly by people who do not know my moods. But it is hard to escape music, whether you sit in an aircraft, walk down an airport terminal or take a seat in a cab. But why must it chase you after you are deposited in your hotel?

I remember once a hotel played Nessun Dorma in the lobby. How did they presume I was in ‘the mood’ to listen to a song about a crazy princess trying to find a poor man’s name so she could have him killed?

This may not be one of my most popular reform proposals, but I do nudge hotels to consider silence.





A right that women don’t have is the right to mediocrity


2024-12-01

There is an implication in this view that one has to be exceptional to become America’s leader or reach the top of other fields. Yet, they would struggle to list what is exceptional about Trump. A way of the world is that it punishes the ordinariness of women and is more understanding of the mediocrity of successful men.

A right that women do not have is the right to mediocrity. I call it a right because it is what most people are, by definition, and people have the right to be themselves.

There was a Trump before Trump, and her name was Sarah Palin, a former governor of Alaska who was a vice-presidential nominee when John McCain ran for president. She once said that she could see Russia from her house in Alaska. She said things an average person would.

While Trump was rewarded for that quality of discourse, she did not survive the torrent of ridicule.

The word ‘mediocrity’ has come to mean something demeaning, but it is intended to describe something between excellence and terrible—the common output of an average person. Ideally, a characteristic of most people, their ordinariness, should not be held against them.

And it is often not held against male leaders. If anything, their ordinariness makes them endearing to others. But when female leaders slip up, or are just dour or mediocre in other ways, they face much more severe scrutiny.

When feminists speak of what the world does not grant or allow women, they often speak of how exceptional women are not given opportunities. In my view, this is not true. It is hard for the world to suppress exceptional women because it is in the self-interest of society to let them thrive.

In any case, exceptional people are rare, and they constitute a tiny proportion of women, too. The real bias against women is in how the world perceives the ordinariness of ordinary women as opposed to the ordinariness of ordinary men. All around us are ordinary men in leadership positions getting away with being ordinary.

The movement to set things right for women had no choice but to glorify success and brilliance. As a result, it is easier today for a man to be unambitious, to choose an ordinary, quiet and healthy life, while it is complex for a woman to overtly say that she wants to achieve nothing.

Even Barbie had to become more than an alluring girlfriend and get dressed in career uniforms and other ambiguous clothes of success. Mediocrity is not only about the capacity of one’s mind; it is also about the ordinariness of aspiration.

Most people do not aspire to anything extraordinary, and it is easier for men to be that way or even say that they want to be that way. In the film Barbie, a character tells the CEO of Barbie’s maker Mattel that it should create an ordinary Barbie who just wants to be a mom.

But the film is nervous to state what it seems keen to say: that women have a right to be ordinary.

There is a stigma attached to mediocrity and even to wishing for an ordinary life. The very bias against women is routed through allegations of their ordinariness; so their champions feel they should never speak of that.

As a result, no one speaks of the actual place where the bias is cruel, where a woman has no defence because what she is accused of may be true, even if it is an unfair charge because a man in her position would get away with it.

When I say that exceptional people are rare, I mean that exceptional people are rare among the successful. Being exceptional is not the prerequisite for success that the world pretends it is.

The educational system, self-help books and motivational talks all suggest that people must prepare to be exceptional to succeed. But people succeed because of ordinary reasons like social networks and dumb luck and because they are so ordinary that they are likeable, fun and belong to a tribe.

While there are advantages to being ordinary, there are drawbacks too. Ordinary people are sometimes caught out of depth. That happens all the time to men in power, but they survive unscathed compared to women in the same position.

At first glance, it may appear that Indian female politicians are an exception. Isn’t it true that the Indian public forgives their failings? Some women have held real power for many years and still do.

I grew up in Tamil Nadu, where J. Jayalalithaa defeated powerful men and held on to power for long. That could happen, I believe, because her gender was not a factor in her political appeal. Women knew that they were voting for a woman, but men had to deify her, as someone more than just a woman, to grant her power over them.

As a politician, she was enormously popular at one point. But when the aura began to fade and her popularity began to slip, when she was faced with corruption charges and could not stave off her political adversaries, she fell faster and harder than men because suddenly she was revealed as a mortal woman, and questions of her mediocrity in ethics had a greater consequence.

The bias against ordinary women exists only in roles that were traditionally held by men. For instance, the captain of a female football team will not be particularly vilified for her ordinariness. Nor a housewife for her ordinariness within the boundaries of what is expected of her in this role.





Trump’s victory has exposed the worst argument of the West


2024-12-08

It is an idea constructed by sophisticated American intellectual systems, and the idea has two parts. One is that the Russian state succeeded in influencing US elections by manipulating public opinion. The second is that Russia and other antagonists of the liberal West did this through the diabolical power of social media, especially Facebook.

Thus the good guys could not exert a moral influence on Americans. This is particularly amusing if you have a long memory.

Because just about eight years before the political emergence of Donald Trump, when Barack Obama used Facebook effectively to campaign, you were told what a great innovation social media was, how the young and the good had found a new tool, leaving conservative uncles clueless.

But later, when the uncle constituency started using social media very effectively, Facebook suddenly became a dark force.

Even if you do not follow Western media, you couldn’t have escaped the view that fake news had an outsized role in the rise of Trump because Western media is so influential that whatever they say reaches you, like it or not. And you would have noticed that this time round, as Donald Trump won again, claims of Russian interference and the hysteria around fake news have been muted.

What happened? Did Russia quit interfering? Fake news ceased to exist? No, there is evidence of Russian attempts to interfere and that large sums of money were poured into countless pieces of fake news in the lead-up to the polls. Just that it is now becoming clear that their impact was limited, or non-existent. There was always such a view, but the good guys have started conceding it only now.

What Western intellectual systems did not get about human nature is that fake news does not add to the popularity of a controversial figure; instead, the popularity of such a figure contributes to the success of fake news. About 10 years ago, Russian fake-news farms didn’t just plant fake news favouring Trump; they also planted news that would favour his opponent, Hillary Clinton.

Maybe they wanted to create rancour, or it could well be that they didn’t know what they were doing, which is always the most underrated theory for many things people do. Fake news that favoured Trump turned out to be a lot more popular than fake news in favour of Clinton.

Not long ago, very few people had ideologies. So few, in fact, that they had a hefty name. Remember ‘ideologue’? Today, almost everyone is one. It is the reason intellectuals have stopped using the term.

There was a time when millions could be influenced by a few. But the age of influence is over, and what we have today is the age of corroboration. People who are called ‘influencers’ are not really that; they are popular because they are corroborators. They say what people want to hear; just that they say it well. The moment they say anything too difficult, their popularity begins to diminish.

If fake news made no difference, why did Western media propagate the view it had a disproportionate role in the popularity of Trump? They believed in that theory. They had to, otherwise they would be reminded of their irrelevance in the field of influence.

Western media not only interprets America for Americans, it also interprets the world for the world. Often, it tells another nation what it should be doing. In its view, a Donald Trump would be a political joke. And that is exactly what it told us.

But he turned out to be very popular, pointing to the possibility that the journalistic, artistic and intellectual systems of a society do not fully grasp the nature of people. They simply didn’t get their own subject matter. So they needed to believe that extraordinary dark forces were responsible for why they initially got the nature of people so wrong.

It is from this desperation that they gave too much credit to “Russian interference.” Also, they had to defame Facebook in particular and all of social media. They had a problem with Facebook even before social media began to diminish the power of the old media.

Not long ago, a single book critic could make a book into a modern classic, a film reviewer could decide a film’s fate and a political editor could influence votes. But the hyper-democracy of social media took the power of the few and gave it to the many. The old media of the West resented that. And with the rise of Trump, they saw in it what they wished to.

If fake news is not responsible for the rise of Trump or any politician, if Russian interference had no impact on US elections, why is there fake news? Who is pouring in all that money and why?

A political entity does many things to sway opinion and win votes. The goal is abstract and not every path needs to be effective. Also, if there is a budget for something, it would attract a type of people who claim they know how to spend it. Also, fake news is probably the easiest and cheapest form of political subterfuge.

And it can be sustained for years without anyone being clear about whether it is worth even the little money it costs. So, it is easier to explain why people spread fake news that makes no difference than to explain why people write poetry.





Gabriel García Márquez in the time of Netflix


2024-12-15

That is how his novel One Hundred Years of Solitude begins. The line merges three periods of time in a single sentence. The narrator talks to us from the present, conveys that he will be executed in a distant future (he is not), and sets up the distant past of his father, where the novel properly begins. I wish I could say that this is why the sentence is memorable.

Or, because a little boy’s discovery of ice is a beautiful surprise in such a grave sentence. But I am sorry. I believe the line has become famous because that’s how far many people have gone with the book. More or less. No doubt, an unknowable multitude have read it fully in many languages, but it is also one of those books that more people revere than have actually read.

Now that Netflix has adapted it as a series, about 100 million people can get to know the classic, including film critics perhaps. And, even though they may like most of what they see, they may also wonder what the fuss over the novel was all about.

Like some classics, One Hundred Years of Solitude is actually a very good novel. Other aspects of its greatness come from the lottery of fame. Why some good novels are better known than other good novels is part of the absurd magic of luck.

Since hype is how good things come to us, the collective subconscious of people tolerates hype and a monopoly over creating it. Novels like this have let the Western literary establishment, which tells us what to read, survive. Yet, intellectuals often get it completely wrong.

The novel is framed as “magic realism,” which is a nonsensical term that takes itself too seriously, as though it has more gravitas than fantasy. Outside fairy tales, all magic in stories is magic realism, including stories in the Bible and Hindu epics. But that is not my quarrel. My quarrel is that the magic in the novel is not about fantasy at all.

Strange things do happen in this family saga that spans a century in Macondo, a fictitious place. There are ghosts, and a person’s blood sets out to go somewhere. Garcia Marquez was trying to narrate how ancient people used to tell a story—by converting metaphors into descriptions and through mistaken views of natural phenomena as supernatural.

When you narrate your grandmom’s stories of what she saw and heard, without the condescension of interpretation, they may seem like magic.

Arthur Clarke once said, “Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic.” This is true of ancient history, too. A historical account by a person in olden times will seem like magic. And this is what Garcia Marquez achieved as a story-telling technique.

A few years ago, it rained red all over Kerala. A vast region appeared to be soaked in blood. Science ruined the magic; it said a meteor had exploded over the region.

If this had happened in another time, people would have said it rained blood one day, they would’ve told that story in a way that would read like a page from One Hundred Years… That is an unspoken playful strand in the book. In fact, this is what it is largely about.

There is a moment in the novel when Macondo is struck by an insomnia plague, which causes inhabitants to forget the names of things.

A few years after its publication in 1975, neurologists formally recognized a form of dementia called semantic dementia, which is remarkably similar to Garcia Marquez’s portrayal. Such a disease must have afflicted a Colombian village long ago and Garcia Marquez must have heard of its tales.

Compared to our distant future, our distant past could be more astounding as magic. There is a lot that has vanished and we have no idea of the sort of things that used to exist. It is not just species that go extinct, but whole ways of human life. Some of that survives in our fables.

Surely, Garcia Marquez was not the first to use fables to tell history, because no one is ever the first in anything. Surely, it is overstated that he derived the technique from his Colombian heritage, for which culture did not tell history through fantasies, exaggerations and metaphors presented as reality? Even the West’s history has a bit of that.

Fantasy that never happened is somewhat lame. It is dull from an intellectual point of view. The power of Garcia Marquez, even when we do not know why we feel it, comes from plausibility.

Surely, he did make up some of what he wrote about and not everything was an exaggeration of metaphors and natural phenomena; even so, to call the book by a foolish term for fantasy is to deny people the actual fun of his work. And the novel is a lot of fun.

Also, generations of writers have ruined themselves trying to imitate this book thinking it is about inserting absurd magical things in the middle of a rational plot.

Garcia Marquez himself was not very pleased with the classification of his genre as magical realism. There is a beautiful line very early in One Hundred Years of Solitude, when he says that the world was so recent that things didn’t have names and you had to point.

And that was what happened with his own works. It was so new to the West at the time that the literary establishment had to invent a name. They would have been more articulate if they had just pointed.





Escaping India within India is an exorbitant exercise


2024-12-22

People tell me that some flats there cost ₹100 crore each. For no fault of mine, a few days ago, a broker sent me a news clipping that said a 16,000-square-foot penthouse in the building sold for ₹190 crore.

That apartment building makes me chuckle, especially when I see it in the smog. I chuckle in my head. I don’t think anyone chuckles aloud when they are alone.

But I don’t know yet why it is funny, at least not very clearly. Maybe it is because the building reminds me that the experience of being super-rich in India is one of the most overpriced things in the world.

In the best areas of London or New York, you pay a premium for what the city offers, and what the city offers is available to everyone. In India, it is the opposite. The city is the problem, and you pay to shut it out, along with most Indians.

I wonder what it is about money that it does not help one escape the miseries of this country—the air and traffic congestion of its vast urban cancers that keep growing. Could class have helped them?

Class is many things, and for an Indian, it is also the ability to be at home in the West, enduring its alien food and surface equality of all. Even though the world has changed, even though new money does not aspire to class anymore, there is plenty of the good life that can come only with class.

Some people tell me that not all the people who have bought flats in that tower actually live there. But many do, and among those who don’t, most of them still live in India, in similar places. In any case, no one disputes that most of India’s wealthiest people do live in India, even though a few may have bought Western citizenships.

People also tell me that the kind of people who live in that building in the smog have many homes across the world. But this characterization of the rich comes from those who are not as rich.

People may own many houses, but they usually have one home. The perception of home is the same across people of varying wealth levels. A home, by definition, need not be a single house, but it usually is. It is made up of people, love and compulsions.

And these are not as portable as people think, even for the rich. A home is where you are stranded. Only a home can have good reasons to keep you there. It can even keep you in a dismal grey town from where you escape now and then, but only to always return.

Also, India’s super-rich get to feel like monarchs only in India and in other poor countries.

I have been inside that building. Its residents invited me once to speak there—in a plush theatre. They showed me their unmatched spa and heated pools. It is a place designed to escape India within India. Good life in India is an archipelago of private islands. Even the upper middle classes live like this—on islands.

When affluent Indians pay for a home or lifestyle, they do not pay for the value of the thing but for the promise that India cannot enter it, at least not easily. India enters as GST, but otherwise, the human embodiment of real India is highly regulated. That is what most of the multi-crore price is for.

It’s not just homes, but also schools, resorts, restaurants and even cinemas that are in reality clubs that keep real India out.

But the price is just about right for the upper middle class. For ₹5-10 crore, one can find a home in a beautiful Gurgaon colony where most of India is stopped at the gates.

Women can walk without worry and children find safe ground. Even this is slightly overpriced because it is comparable to the price of a home of similar size in, say, Brooklyn.

But the super-rich have to pay inordinate amounts, not only to claim to be rich in India, but also to live and feel like rich people and exorcise the spirit of real India. They either build an entire skyscraper for themselves or live in those buildings in the smog, paying atrocious amounts. After paying so much, they still cannot entirely escape India.

The upper middle class has developed ways of exclusion that cost nothing or very little. They use what is called “culture” and a bit of sophistication to exclude most Indians from their daily lives. In the Madras of my childhood, for instance, it was classical music and dance.

The upper middle class also uses high education and narrow specializations to nurture exclusive clubs where the other India simply has no chance to present itself.

The super-rich, on the other hand, only have money. And money has long divorced class, so some old-money people with class do not see the luxury in having to share their enchanting social circuits with others who have money today.

The super-rich across the world face a general problem. Capitalism, ironically, does not serve its true masters well. There are simply no real products for the very wealthy that only they can afford and enjoy. The best phone, cinema or even holiday is available to the merely affluent.

So the super-rich are sold outlandish lemons—like a risky journey to the edge of Earth’s atmosphere packaged as “space,” or to the depths of the ocean to see an old wreckage.

But at least the billionaires of the West can dabble in longevity science or bet on politics without facing ruin if their bets turn bad. The super-rich of Gurgaon only have a building in the smog.





Why we’re lucky to be Indians in such a terrible world


2024-12-29

This sentiment is new. Indians have for long said some good things about India, but many were probably faking it, or talking about an ancient India, or did not quite know what they were talking about. But what I hear now, that we are lucky to be Indians, is honest, and even true.

In the past, many of us have thought of the worst places on Earth and broadly thanked our stars that at least we are in India, but never before have so many regions made us feel so lucky.

In any relationship, saying that you are lucky to have it is high praise. And so too when people feel that way about their nation, even if it is just that half the world around us appears to be in ruins or under threat.

The world was always in turmoil, and there were always writers who told us about it. But now we can see extraordinary videos that show just how violent modern violence is.

Even when there is no war, a cartel of thugs can make generations suffer. A mere five years is half the span of a childhood, and in that period a whole generation can lose its future. In that way, many regions of the world have regressed.

Sometimes I do wonder, though, if we are really luckier than war-torn places. A few weeks ago, when Israel declared that it was going to attack some hideouts in southern Lebanon, the region’s residents fled north. I saw a photograph of cars leaving southern Lebanon—in three orderly lanes.

And as an Indian, I could only think there appeared to be a greater quality of life in the way Lebanese fled than in how Indians in Bengaluru drove every day to work.

Maybe Indians don’t need a war to be war-torn. Surely, bad air and filthy water kill more Indians than any war anywhere in the world. There are places in Gurgaon that are so filthy, poverty-stricken and filled with rubble, shanties and miserable people that I could fool half the world into thinking these are snapshots from Gaza.

But then, there is a difference between the effects of violence and of mere bad governance, even if they look and feel the same. That is why our flaws, even though they are destructive, appear trivial compared to what many places endure. India’s gift to its own is a shot at a peaceful life, even if it is an unnecessarily difficult one.

India is so large, and there are so many of us, that the nation cannot entirely escape everything that human nature can inflict. There are regions that have seen long periods of strife—like Punjab and parts of the Northeast. But still, broadly, most of us are right in feeling lucky for being Indian.

How come? Why have we got away? Why is there relative peace? Considering all the corruption and atrocities and poor quality of governance, how has India pulled off a largely peaceful society?

In some regions, India’s political wounds have been weaponized. But, outside Punjab and the Northeast, and some jungles in the south, they could not be sustained. One of the reasons is the nature of Indians.

After independence, ordinary Indians in most of India did not have a motive to risk their lives for a cause. For instance, outside Kashmir, very few Indian Muslims have been involved in acts of terror. Even those who tried it turned out to be lousy at it, compared to people from other nations.

A confidential report prepared in 2015 by the intelligence agencies of several nations suggested that the Islamic State thought that the few Indian Muslims who joined it were pretty bad at terror and could not be exploited as suicide bombers.

The Islamic State’s analysis was based on the mere two dozen or so Indians it had managed to recruit. Also, at the peak of its fame, Al Qaeda failed to draw in Indians.

In the 1980s, Velupillai Prabhakaran, who founded the Sri Lankan terror syndicate LTTE, seemed to have immense emotional support among Tamilians in Tamil Nadu, even though India officially was at war with the outfit. In fact, a popular DMK government was dismissed in 1991 by the Centre because of its ties with the LTTE.

But Prabhakaran may have miscalculated the nature of Tamilian sympathy for his cause. The LTTE assassinated former Indian prime minister Rajiv Gandhi in vengeance for sending in a peace-keeping force to fight his guerrillas. DMK leader Karunanidhi went around Madras in an open jeep, his palms joined in unspoken apology.

I saw the sight myself, standing on the street as a boy. In the polls that followed, his party lost in all but two constituencies. The people of Tamil Nadu had expressed their disgust. Apparently, they could support a violent struggle far away in a foreign land, but not if it had come home.

But then, the nature of people is not enough for peace. Just a few violent men can create and sustain violence in a region.

This did occur in some places in India, but a very Indian phenomenon always nipped it in the bud—in practice, there are few human rights for the poor, the sort of people who are hired by ideologues to carry out violence.

Security forces swiftly killed or made suspects vanish. The consequences of going to war against the Indian state were and are severe.

In a way, a part of our luck comes from some dark place.





Longevity is usually a reward for being unspectacular


2025-01-05

For a man who was said to be incapable of subterfuge or even office politics, a skill in which Indians excel, Dr. Singh thrived in public office. He had been governor of the Reserve Bank of India and our most famous finance minister before he became one of India’s longest-serving prime ministers.

And he could achieve all this not only because he had an economic vision, but chiefly because he was not politically extraordinary. His source of power was assured that he would always need them and that he would never develop another source.

Often, endurance is nature’s reward to a person whose presence is not spectacular. This phenomenon can be seen in almost everything humans do.

This is why corporate bosses, even when they claim, “I only hire people who are smarter than me,” typically don’t do that at all, especially when that fact is too evident in the ‘smarter’ candidate.

A nerd with narrow genius and no managerial prospects might fare well, but people whose presence or role is spectacular in a broad way do not go very far up the tapering hierarchy.

Founders and entrepreneurs always pounce on super talent as they are at no threat of being eclipsed, but in a typical office, the calibre of a boss is often the upper limit for talent in his team.

The spectacular have to, sooner or later, quit the safety of their salaried jobs and take their chances in entrepreneurship, where they are dependent on ‘clients,’ who are usually salaried executives.

The way people celebrate the spectacular, it would appear as though they are wired to back the extraordinary. But the fact is they make life difficult for those who are special and cannot be tamed.

What the world celebrates is success, as though it has a grudging admiration for the spectacular who managed to make it despite everything the ordinary threw at them. Usually, most spectacular people don’t make it very far.

When Manmohan Singh’s political career strayed into the spectacular, it created an environment where he could continue to lead the nation. He had unexpectedly trumped all the politicking satraps of the Congress party to become prime minister, not once, but twice.

The satraps had had enough. His second term was tormented by the politicking of those who thought they deserved to be in his seat. Not just that, the Indian middle class, whose hero he had been for two decades, whom he had directly enriched, seemed to turn against him. They found tiring the very calm things that they had once found appealing.

Particularly amusing was their lament that he did not stand up to party bosses. But then, that was probably their nature too, for that is the nature of the average person. That is how the ordinary survive and even thrive, by not taking on the bosses whose power favours them.

At least Singh had the courage to pick his battles. In the end, he had survived in politics for so long that he became formidable whether he liked to be so or not. And he was assailed by his own party.

Even in cricket, nature rewards the ordinary through a long career. Athletes like Sachin Tendulkar are rare. They endured for long in spite of their spectacular brilliance. Usually, people at that level shine bright for a few years and vanish, developing an injury or losing control of unhealthy habits.

In cricket, they survive through the hyperbole of captaincy, which is the traditional refuge of middling batsmen or great batsmen who are past their prime.

Mostly, the sort of batsmen who endure, who last long, are Test plodders—who do not take risks, who do not have too many strokes in them to increase their chance of getting out. As in most of life, so in cricket, the ordinary endure. Even the former greats endure through ordinariness.

Endurance is greatness for ordinary people; it is compensation for ordinariness. Can it then be that companies or even professions where people can endure for long are usually spheres in decay? Like, say, the bureaucracy, where people last even beyond retirement?

Even in the animal world, endurance is a reward for not being spectacular. Animals in the zoo, for instance, outlive their feral relatives. Humans too have begun to endure because we do not have to do anything spectacular anymore. Once, being a spectacular human was to be a warrior or an athlete who took many risks.

Now, the spectacular person is someone who wishes to enjoy the material life. Those who live less interesting lives are destined to endure. Even in recreational running, the trick to keep at it well into old age is to maintain a low average heart rate, done by mixing runs with short walks. While great sprinters eventually stop, steady-paced runners can keep going for years.

Current Prime Minister Narendra Modi has used his popular charisma to strengthen his hold. And he, too, has endured. Though his case is as rare as Tendulkar’s. Before him, the last prime minister whose leadership was spectacular was Indira Gandhi, but in a time that was more conducive to the rise of such leaders.

An important quality, though, of modern spectacular leaders is that when they started off their careers, they were not so spectacular; or never showed that side.





India has become too rich to let petty clerks torment people


2025-01-12

I learnt that the site of the Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) has been partially down for months.

The site would have been kinder to me if it were entirely down, but its cruelty is in drawing me to fill out all the numbers, including the exact second when biometric data was given, and then saying, “We’re unable to process your request due to temporary outages of our services.”

For weeks, the same message. It’s a vital site, but has been this way for months.

A tout told me that I would get an Aadhaar number if I paid ₹4,000. So, I wonder, though I have no evidence beyond the experience of being an Indian, if there is a connection between the site being partially down and the subterranean system that charges a fee to get the job done.

It is the same with many other government services, like the renewal of a driver’s licence. Everything is supposed to be ‘online,’ but nothing is. The link is always down, but a tout can get things done.

Also, I suspect that the poor are not as harassed as the upper-middle class because we can pay more in bribes. (A system that is corrupt for the rich but efficient for the poor could make it look as though the process is clean.)

I know people who have been denied Aadhaar on account of ‘glitches,’ which magically get sorted once they pay a bribe. One couple who tried to get a number for their minor son were told their documents were rejected because the school’s seal was a rectangle and not a circle.

Foreigners teaching in an international school who needed Aadhaar numbers to access their bank accounts ran around for weeks trying to get these, until they realized that someone had to be paid off.

Why are simple things so difficult in India? I can understand and even accept many of the consequences of living in a mostly poor country. In return for cheap labour that makes middle-class existence feel like affluence, we face third-world problems.

But I do feel that a lot of misery in India caused by petty corruption is unnecessary. No public hardship is necessary, but there is a natural sort caused by a paucity of funds and infrastructure. There is another sort of daily suffering Indians go through that is possible for India to abolish.

There was a time we could not have done it; India was too under-developed. But not anymore. There is no reason why petty clerks should be allowed to inflict so much misery.

There is a traffic signal in my neighbourhood that I am sure is also gamed. Its red light lasts 180 seconds, and its green light lasts for 20. Across the junction, cops hide behind objects.

They wait for an outraged motorist to violate a red light. I think there is a direct connection between the short green light and the hidden cops.

Many of India’s petty miseries that lower our quality of life are unnecessary, by which I mean that people in power can easily solve them without a drop in their material well-being. We can understand this better by thinking about the big problems that we cannot actually solve.

Some reforms seem almost impossible. For example, it routinely takes 90 minutes to two hours to commute between Delhi and Gurgaon. It is a problem that India cannot solve immediately because it was caused by an ingrained inability to plan well ahead of time.

Also, a smooth flow of traffic requires roads and metro systems that can cost thousands of crores, and policies that limit the use of private cars. The same goes for air pollution. These are complex problems that cannot be resolved quickly.

But many of our public miseries are not caused by India’s economic state. Our backwardness is not anymore caused by our low income.

There is, in fact, a region that does not have many of the problems that India faces, and it has a higher quality of life than most of the country in the form of clean air, food and healthcare; yet, it does not have an income level that is significantly higher than rest of the nation: Kerala.

If this state were a nation, it would be a proper middle-income Asian nation, with almost all its human indices outperforming India’s. Barring buses, Kerala’s public utilities are excellent, including government hospitals and schools.

One of the cleanest Olympic-sized swimming pools I have seen was a public pool in Thiruvananthapuram. And it cost almost nothing to swim there. In all of Kerala, there is cleanliness. Also, hygienic cheap food. The state has some problems, but they are not caused by government clerks.

As a nation progresses, a time comes when petty corruption ceases to exist without altering the prospects of the country’s most powerful people. In nations like China, the powerful were enriched by putting an end to petty corruption.

We can see a bit of this in how Indian politicians have generally moved up the value chain. In the Madras of my childhood, politicians controlled water tankers, bought land and ran marriage halls. Senior cops owned autorickshaw networks.

Today, they have more sophisticated investments. As the powerful move up, they are supposed to clean up petty corruption at lower levels. This is not for ethical reasons, but out of self-interest. This is how advanced economies have prospered, and how smart middle-income nations are moving ahead.

India doesn’t do even corruption well.





What protects us from being stabbed in our own homes?


2025-01-19

If film star Saif Ali Khan can be stabbed by an intruder in his home, that too in a Bandra flat, what does it say about our safety and those whom we love?

Hours after the attack, there was a familiar sight outside the hospital where he was recovering.

His family and friends emerged from cars.

There was a glow about them and their clothes looked unusual as they walked through a parted crowd of onlookers who looked like the rest of India, poorer and more provincial, and with no glow.

This India is also what protects India’s elite from criminal dangers that lurk not far from where they live.

Like Saif Ali Khan, many of us live in secure buildings, with cameras that probably work and guards in fancy-dress paramilitary costumes.

They do protect us, but our primary protection, the thing that really guards us, is something else, something fundamentally Indian.

The attack on Khan is an aberration.

Generally, India is safe for its urban middle class and the affluent.

Safe as in safe from criminal danger. You could end up dead on the road because of Indian road design or how Indians drive, or lose your life to lax enforcement of safety protocols in buildings, but the middle class and rich do not usually need to worry about criminals.

In some aspects, we are safe not only compared to middle-income countries in Africa and Latin America, but also in comparison with the West.

And that is because of an Indian quality that is not exactly noble, which is also why it works.

India’s rich live in a way that is more risky than they would like to accept.

We depend on people rather than systems. Home security here is more cheap labour on stools than hard tech.

Also, we are served by a whole little crowd of maids, cooks, gardeners and drivers; we live with strangers in our homes, who have access to its every inch, who have their own lives, their own mobile phones and their own acquaintances with whom they probably discuss us.

And a police verification can be procured for ₹500. Even if the house help is of sterling character, we have no idea about her boyfriend, or brother, or someone she met on Instagram.

Yet, we are safe.

We face more dangers from our peers than India’s poor.

And in some inner recess of the mind, we are aware of a force that protects us.

What protects us, to the extent it can, is the brutal side of India.

If at all there is anything worse than poverty, it is an Indian jail and to be caught in the Indian judicial system for criminal activity. It is a deadly deterrent.

India exacts a very heavy price for hurting its elite.

Even Mumbai’s organized crime, which extorted the city’s rich, had to go.

Gangsters flourished when they gamed the judicial system.

Professional lawyers would get them bail. Even if they were jailed, they would run their operations from inside.

So, a section of the police decided to kill them, at least those who were useless to them.

Organized extortion ended in Mumbai because of a suspension of human rights for those the cops marked as criminals.

It was generally popular, and greatly encouraged by powerful people.

The daughter of a businessman who was once abducted by the underworld and who had to pay a lot of money in ransom for his life told me about her vehement joy at the elimination of the gangsters and how much she despised films that glorified them.

The same brutality, or its potential, raises the stakes for all criminals.

Not just in cities, but even in dangerous places, there appears to be a line that criminals should not cross for they would be eliminated if they did.

Now and then, we hear of rapists of minors who are shot dead by the police, and society is not interested in investigating the circumstances that led to their “encounters.”

What India cannot do with competent legal systems, it accomplishes in informal ways.

But this way of keeping us safe has a flaw.

It is a flaw that all security systems have, including clean official systems and even technological systems. They are rational.

They are meant to protect us from a rational criminal who has common sense.

But there are people who are not rational. They might be mentally disturbed, or they might be desperate drug addicts who do not think rationally.

Often, the guy who manages to breach security and walk into a building does so in the most irrational way. He just walks in.

Most of the time, irrational criminals get caught, but it is of little consequence to the victims.

Even in this regard, India’s roughness protects the upper class.

Indian life is a natural filtering process. People who are dangerous, especially if they are poor, do not survive too long. They are killed or apprehended soon after they become a danger. Or, they just die alone of neglect and disease.

In comparison, more just societies like the United States and Europe appear to have more empowered dangerous people.

A few weeks ago, a man walked into a New York subway train and burned a woman alive, a woman he had never known. A few days after that in New York, a man pushed another onto the subway platform.

It’s not as though these things cannot happen here, but for a nation of this size, Indian cities appear to witness far less mindless crimes.

But I wonder how long Indian cities can maintain their relative safety in a changing world where there is more compassion for the poor and the unlucky and the dangerous among them can survive far longer than before.

And India will find it hard to be as brutal as before in those unseen rooms where parallel justice is dealt.

The author is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’.





Migrating to the US has long been a rite of humiliation


2025-01-26

Even the most dignified part of the process, which was the first step, where the bright applied for a student visa to go study something in science, lacked grace.

An enduring memory of my childhood in Madras is the sight of a half mile-long queue of the city’s cultural elite for their fateful visa interviews. They were top rankers, IITians and doctors and those who had got job offers, and they waited for hours in the hot sun (the consulate put up sun shades only years later).

For people like me, who had no prospects and passed by Mount Road in public buses, it was the first clear sight of what prospects really looked like—a wait outside the American consulate. And my lack of prospects didn’t seem so bad.

But when the bus turned a corner, a familiar fear filled all of us who chose to be artists and were apparently of no use to America and the ‘Free World’—if you were not standing in that queue with a science degree, what would become of you?

That America is a “land of immigrants” is among the nonsensical flourishes of language, on par with “spirit of Mumbai.” America may have once accepted all sorts of people, but they and their descendants have no particular fondness of immigrants anymore.

At most, they only want the rich and talented, and even among the talented, only those who would be of practical use.

So, generations of Indians worked hard to become useful to America. Some even fooled themselves into believing they were needed because Americans were “dumb.” But one way or another, talented Indians figured that their place in the US was created because there were things Americans did not wish to do anymore, or at least not for such low pay.

Visa holders found their spouses could not work and their green cards did not always convert into citizenship. And now, strategically conceived children born on US soil will not get US citizenship if Trump has his way. His order may get struck down by courts, but it is hard to miss the layers of humiliation in going to a place where too many people wish to go.

For centuries, only the poor and the persecuted migrated. They fled. Even the early European migrants to the US were either destitute or mistreated. The social elite had no reason to move out.

Then, in the mid-20th century, the upper classes of poor nations began moving to the US. These were the cultural elite, if not the economic elite, who had an immense head start in their own society. It was yet another opportunity life gifted them—migrate to a richer nation.

They had to pay a price. From being masters in their home towns, atop the social pyramid, they became something else in America that can be captured by an expression Indians once used commonly: “second-class citizens.” What they meant by this was that the American upper classes viewed them the way they viewed lower classes in India.

Everywhere, the migrant is treated badly. The poor are equipped to take it in their stride because they are used to being treated in this manner even if they are not migrants. The Indian upper class is not so suited for poor treatment. Every little discrimination stings them.

This may explain why many of them began to love India more than Indians themselves back home. When an old elite feels slighted in a new place, it compensates with great love for what made it feel special. An unspoken history of the world is how America, to which the elite of poor nations thronged, created expat nationalism.

As another form of compensation, possibly, some of these immigrants also acquired an exaggerated swag—that they succeeded in America because they were bright and “worked very hard,” compared to other groups.

It is this popular but dim analysis that American politician Vivek Ramaswamy appears to have aired in a recent tweet: “Our American culture has venerated mediocrity over excellence for way too long… A culture that celebrates the prom queen over the math olympiad champ… I know multiple sets of immigrant parents in the 90s who actively limited how much their kids could watch those TV shows precisely because they promoted mediocrity… and their kids went on to become wildly successful STEM graduates…”

The truth reveals itself if you trace the lineage of successful individuals of ‘Indian origin’ who claim to have done well because they “worked hard.” The first wave of Indian immigrants did well chiefly because they were the actual or metaphorical Brahmins of where they came from; they had an enormous head-start not only over other Asian immigrants, but also over most Americans. Their children, in turn, were better placed to harvest their luck. Yet, it is important for the Indian community in America to go on about “hard work.” The false preening of the lucky often makes the less fortunate feel that it is all their fault, when usually it is not.

Elite Indians in the US, it seems, want Trump’s America to make a distinction between Indians and Mexicans, and all the other immigrants who face his ire, including “irregular” Indian immigrants.

But then, typically, the ruling class of a society does not see people through income statistics and their college degrees. It goes by appearances. And to much of the American elite, maybe all Indians look the same. In fact, all immigrants may look the same.

The author is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’.





Why nobody talks about India’s ‘brain drain’ anymore


2025-02-02

Yet, we enthusiastically debated the issue. The debate wasn’t over whether brain drain existed, but whether the government should stop it. Now, for some reason, I don’t hear anyone use that expression, though occasionally people do mention that our “brightest” go to the US.

The reason for its disappearance isn’t that society felt our feelings needed to be protected. I think what has happened is that nobody truly believes brain drain is real—or at least not in the way it was once imagined.

To most Indians, the brain is still an organ that is useful in cracking objective-type exams, or being good at any science. In that sense, the Indian brain has not expanded. It is just that the migration of ‘brains’ has not had any impact on India because there are so many brains.

We have easily filled the spaces that the so-called bright vacated by leaving India. Not just that. The kind of people who were once considered ‘brains’ turned out to be merely people who were lucky enough to be born in the right homes. Just look at what happened when opportunities seeped down the social pyramid.

In fact, today, the children of the affluent who are inclined to “do science,” or whose parents want them to do it, leave India because they can’t compete with other Indians for admissions to any of the most sought-after engineering colleges. The children of IITians, generally, have little chance of getting into the Indian Institutes of Technology. The upper class is unable to compete with equality.

In any case, the migration of thousands of scientific ‘brains’ has not been a drain. When the upper classes vacate their monopoly, others step in to fill the gap. The elite have been quitting not only India, but also entire fields like hardcore engineering. In a world where parents want to be nicer, children are drifting towards more enjoyable or fashionable fields, like rocketry. This gives other classes the chance to venture into what were once fiefdoms of the elite.

We have easily filled the spaces that the so-called bright vacated by leaving India.

What drops in this process is the field’s prestige. The urban upper crust does something and insists that others regard it as “brainy” and lucrative. Others imitate them, slog for years, and achieve the capacity to do that “brainy” thing. But they realize the rewards are not the same for them. Once the elite vacates something, those spheres lose their allure. (This happened to the civil services and railway bureaucracy, too.)

Older IITians now say that the current profile of the Indian engineer student is appalling. Older bureaucrats say the same of the civil services. Because now they seem to see the ‘brain’ as not just an organ that cracks an entrance exam, but as something that produces a “rounded personality,” by which they often mean quizzing and playing Carnatic music. That is what the IITians of my generation did.

There is a view in India that we have millions of science and engineering degree-holders but very few talented people. And that those with any talent leave the country. The idea that the migration of people who are very good in science has reduced the quality of Indian intellectual life is an opinion that many people still hold. Yet, it is not a ‘brain drain’ because few truly believe that those people could have done much here.

Many years ago, a chief guest at a convocation ceremony at IIT Madras said, “Brain drain is better than brain in the drain.” I don’t know if it was his original joke, but what I know is that all of Madras got to know within hours, and how we all laughed. Some of them who laughed are American citizens now and they do not laugh anymore at India jokes. Now, no chief guest would crack such a joke, but that is not because India has become a cradle of scientific innovation.

For a scientific genius to have an impact, he or she needs the right environment, which is best created by a combination of a government that knows what it is doing and capitalistic greed. American tech is largely the creation of the US government. That is why it is laughable that tech ‘bros’ keep talking about “small government.” Their own fortunes have been driven by government policy to a large extent.

There is, however, such a thing as a brain drain in one respect. It is not really about the migration of some people from India to the West. It is a drain within the sciences. Whatever gets hyped attracts the cream of scientific talent for years. And it also diverts the attention of enterprise, and even the government.

Take the current hysteria around artificial intelligence, for instance. It holds some promise of public benefits in the vague distant future, but if the past is any indicator, millions of ‘brains’ would have worked for billions of hours to create a whole new array of frivolous things. And at the expense of scientific fields that are left reeling in neglect.

Just as the arts probably lost its best to the sciences, many sciences are losing talent to narrower domains of tech. Science, today, survives on hype. Modern medicine has been stuck for ages. It is not as transformative as it appears, especially if you are a healthy person. And, compared to a hundred years ago, we have not expanded our understanding of much.

We still have no clue what gravity is at a fundamental level. And we travel by air at the same speed as our grandparents. That is brain drain.

The author is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’.





Trump’s Gaza plan may be more pragmatic than it looks


2025-02-09

The second-best is not Donald Trump’s original idea. Such a plan was mooted around the time Israel was formed in 1948, and later by Jewish nationalists. It was never a popular idea.

Long before Trump pitched it as an American real-estate redevelopment plan, it was disliked by those who represented the Palestinian people, those who were conscious of their moral compass and those who did not want the problem to end because conflict was their business. It was also disliked by Arab nations that loved Palestinians from afar and seemed reluctant to have them settling in their territory. Trump probably knew that—which was why he said the people of Gaza could be taken in by “humanitarian” Arab nations.

The relocation of Gaza’s Palestinians, who number half the number of passengers who take the Delhi Metro everyday, to resolve one of the greatest problems of the modern world is not as outlandish as it seems at first glance. Certainly not as a logistical problem.

Gaza’s Palestinians have been relocated before in huge numbers. The wealthy and lucky among them left. Many live in other Arab nations, and also in the US and Europe. Much of the Palestinian elite did ‘relocate’ to other countries, leaving the poor behind to fight for the Palestinian cause.

This is a familiar story in every conflict zone. I saw it as a child in Madras among the swarms of middle-class Tamils who fled elsewhere (the rich fled to the UK).

The correct way to frame the relocation question is this: Now that the Palestinian elite live outside Palestine, can the poor too be relocated to nations ready to take them?

Across the world, and for ages, the poor have relocated for better prospects. Look at the Indians who were deported by the US. They faced no violent conflict here. Yet, they left India, endured conditions worse than ultra marathons, climbed hills and almost died along the way, all to enter the US.

If there is a secret referendum among the people of Gaza on their willingness to move out of the debris to other Arab nations, I am confident most will say ‘yes.’ Because the poor in a poor region tend to have the exact opposite view of their rich expats.

Many people around the world who want poor Palestinians to stay put in Gaza and fight for a Palestinian state actually live in places that evicted natives. What do you think our places were before; and where did those people go? They were expected to pack their things and disperse, and that is what they did. That is the history of all big cities. But Israel is in a more complicated place.

Here is a brief history of the conflict’s origin. In the late 19th century, the Jewish elite of Britain came up with the idea of going back to their mythical promised land, Palestine, to escape a violent bias against them. This bold idea found support from the Jewish elite globally. Also from the mainstream British and European elite, possibly because they wanted the ‘Jewish problem’ to go away.

It might seem bizarre today that Europeans could just go somewhere and claim land, but it was the golden age of racism. It is as though they did not see natives as real people. When Jewish settlements in Palestine began, half a million Arabs lived there. They were stateless. Many were nomadic. As Jews settled in larger numbers, skirmishes began between local Arabs and settlers.

The idea of a Palestinian identity was not formed yet. It was a creation of the Arab elite in response to the rising power of Jewish settlers in the region. Once the state of Israel was created, most Arab nations denied its right to exist, but the brilliant little nation overcame its bigger foes and kept expanding to push Palestinians into slivers of land. One of these was Gaza.

While Palestinians want their own sovereign state, Israel fears an independent Palestine next to it because it would be easier for extremist groups like Hamas to execute their stated dream—the obliteration of Israel.

If Palestinians vacate Gaza, what happens to their wish for Palestinian statehood? Would the inland West Bank suffice? The chances of a Palestine state would look bleaker than ever before. But then, the world is only pretending that Palestinians have not lost. This is at the heart of the trouble.

In a more ancient world, which was a less compassionate place, wars ended conflicts decisively. The losers were all killed or subsumed. The meaning of loss was very clear. But the modern world does not recognize defeat. Now, the defeated linger. They can survive long years as stateless people, bereaved and maimed. And if they are given a choice to escape their torment and move to another place for lives of dignity, there is an army of faraway humanitarians who won’t give them even that chance.

Those who scoff at Trump’s relocation plan, do they have another solution to the problem? Of course. This is their solution: the people of Gaza should magically shed Hamas and any other band of armed thugs Iran may fund, and talk peacefully with Israel, which will magically start believing that Palestinians would make excellent neighbours.

This is the mainstream plan of the global intellectual world, endorsed by people who consider Trump’s relocation plan “improbable.” They had also said that about Donald Trump’s presidency.

The author is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’.





Our politics is usually shaped by the people we dislike


2025-02-16

The legend of Elon Musk was the creation of wokes, who include people who call other people woke. Wokes are those who have to make a guess about what it means to be a decent human being. They are tremendous in building cult figures very fast because they talk a lot about what they adore with others who adore the same things.

At the time, the US tech industry was not called ‘techbros’; I think it was called Silicon Valley, if my memory is correct, and tech billionaires were all “good guys.” Facebook was good, cryptos were good, and Apple was so good that the sort of people who would have been hippies in the previous generation stood in midnight queues every time the corporation released a new product.

These cool coders were going to change the world. And Musk was an environmental warrior because he had acquired an electric car company called Tesla and was out to kill the internal combustion engine. Musk said things that wokes loved. He spoke about climate action and direct democracy, for example. He sounded like a Democrat. He worked with Barack Obama and donated to the Democratic Party too. So what happened?

It does happen commonly—men who appear to have the same politics as women are soon revealed as charlatans, or just misunderstood. Still, how did he get associated with Caucasian racism? Does an adult really change his political convictions so fast?

Donald Trump was a registered Democrat for nearly 10 years, and donated to the party. For decades, as an American celebrity, he was probably a regular New York liberal who did not take himself seriously. What could have happened to him? Why is he at war with the whole empathy industry? How is a man not known for believing in anything suddenly the world’s most impactful conservative ideologue? It is in fact odd to describe him with any serious word that would end in ‘-gue.’

The political direction that Trump and Musk took was probably influenced by those who vilified them. They are now at war with all that was dear to their deriders: welfare state, bureaucracy, unelected institutions, liberal media, wokes, migrants, diversity, feminists, transgenders and probably all of the humanities.

This is how it works with ordinary people too. Most of them are not public figures, so they may not have public enemies. Whom they despise are their preachy colleagues, nasty bosses, acquaintances and spouses, who are the most under-rated counter-influencers. Many political ideas of ordinary men and women are shaped by dislike for their spouses.

That a society changes because of the reforms of career reformers is nonsense transmitted by reformers. Instead, a society changes when people want to defeat those they dislike. Modernity itself occurs chiefly because children do not want to be their parents, or when they want to be the exact opposite. When they are unable to do so, or when they are held under their parents’ influence for too long, a society regresses.

Apart from modernity, there are other changes in a society, and these occur in every generation through the same process. The nature of media only changes the speed of transformation: the young hold mild opinions; then some people who form the political mainstream harm or annoy them, and so they develop views that go against those of their tormentors.

This mechanism does not distinguish between what is called the ‘left’ and ‘right’ in politics. The ‘right’ is a reaction to the ‘left,’ just as the ‘left’ is a reaction to the ‘right.’ No one is born with a political wound. Something happens. It always does. But some people react more than most, depending on their mental health.

Also, political victimhood gives an opportunity to the ordinary evil inside most of us to express evil in the name of ideology. That is why we see such festive aggression in both wokes and ultra-nationalists. They are the same kind of people, just that they have been miffed by different sorts of people. Also, strong political opinions give people an easy way to appear upright and moral. For instance, I have seen corrupt men and those who have sexually harassed their colleagues rant against Trump.

A defining quality of our times is that everyone appears to have a political opinion. But that is only their appearance. People have more trouble with the ambassadors of ideas than the ideas themselves. Most people are in reality moderate because they don’t have extreme opinions, just disdain for some people.

A large number of Indians dislike sanctimonious evangelists of ‘secularism’ more than the idea of it; most people dislike climate activists who vandalize art more than what they stand for; many people can explain why they loathe posh socialists, but not why they can’t stand socialism.

This is because all mainstream ideas have a point. They have to be moral, otherwise they would not have survived infancy to go mainstream. Morality is the tax an idea has to pay to survive. Even Trump and Musk cloak all their views as concern for Americans. Also, no mainstream political idea violates human nature.

Another reason why people don’t have trouble with ideas is that they do not know enough about them beyond their synopsis. But annoying people is a different matter. We see a lot in people.

The author is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’.





America and the bearable loneliness of losing the West


2025-02-23

When I was a kid, I believed the West was a place. Then I realized that all of the West was not entirely the West. The West was an idea, an invention. When you put it this way, it looks as though it is some kind of subterfuge to overwhelm human instincts.

But I like that about the West—that it was an invention. What is so great about nature and human nature anyway? We worship nature without thinking. Human intervention against our own animal biology is probably the very meaning of human wisdom.

What is happening in America will help us understand the meaning of the West— through its collapse there. A lot of what Donald Trump is doing actually makes sense. Or let us say it makes logical sense; it is even familiar.

A powerful man is setting out to consolidate his power, to do what he wants without the inconvenience of being resisted. He favours his rich friends, and a gang of rich people are trying to see how they can benefit from his rule. Together, they want to convey that falling in line will be rewarded and fighting them painful. This makes sense because this is how leaders behave in most of the world. Now America is beginning to appear like any other country.

And now we see clearly what the West stood for, in theory—the idea that a popularly elected leader has to be controlled and tamed by conscientious clerks, that the point of a society is not to be practical, but for the strong to care for the weak, that everyone must be free to express themselves, especially minorities. The West said all this without fables of divinity or anything mystical. As for why idealism was better than pragmatism, it had no evidence, but persuaded us all.

But then, even before Trump, it was becoming clear that the ideals of the West were a theology that used morals to favour some people. And its evangelism of democracy was not meant to make the world a better place, but to weaken other countries’ revolutions—the chaos that America once thought it was safe from. Just as rogue states promoted terrorism to weaken their enemies but were consumed by the same thing.

Everything the West did, buoyed by its cultural heft, was better than what I was used to. Even intellectually, the West seemed superior. Rich or poor, people in every generation who want to make something of their lives want to head to a place where all the magic is. Once it was Alexandria, and there was Nalanda, or so I am told. The West held that magic in modern times. People not only flocked to it physically, but also mentally.

Trump keeps talking about the US trade deficit, but there was always a cultural surplus that America and Europe maintained with the rest of the world. There was a demand gap.

We were more interested in them than they were in us. Whatever they said was good, we read. I remember as a teenager marvelling at some of the literary works of the West. Now, when I read them, I find many were mediocre. I can see through the ordinariness of Western acclaim and how that acclaim is an industry in itself—meant to promote a certain way of thinking, a certain set of people.

Nobody in Somalia or India, or even China, hosts an award that Western artists covet. This should give you an idea of the cultural gap. It was underpinned by the notion that Western intellectuals are very discerning of the arts and intellectual pursuits, that they are free, and their savants are not people who suck up to a strongman but independent thinkers that only the West could foster.

One way or another, in some form, we accepted that. That is why we read the works of those people more than they read ours, and we watch their films and listen to their music even though they know almost nothing about us. What tariffs could bridge our cultural deficit with the West? That is a subject for another column.

Now that the West has been diminished and it is hard for us to adore everything it produces, I find its humanities lingo unbearable, especially when one of its eggheads says something like this: ‘…a richly layered meditation on the loss of an ideal and a mournful critique…’

But the West’s loss of moral and intellectual heft feels like a form of loneliness. For years, many of us had something to enjoy, something to accept, and a sense of direction, but now we only have home. Like villagers forced to return to a village from a great city.

There is also a surprising area where the West has failed.

It has turned inefficient in a banal way. Recently, when I was at Berlin airport, my luggage took one hour to arrive. Trains were delayed by hours every day. This was not the image I had of Germany. The country simply doesn’t have enough people to do mindless tasks. Germans are confused about poor migrants who can do that for them. They want them, but don’t want to see them. And the promise of mindless machines doing all repetitive jobs is yet to come true.

I still enjoy the spectacle of the West. All the beauty and order and street joys that their wealth and past plunder have created. Of all the things that the West once meant to us, we are now only left with winding cobbled ways.

The author is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’.





How entertainment got boring in the age of streaming


2025-03-02

Indeed, the article could not substantiate its premise. But no one disputes that people scroll while watching something and that they are generally bored with both typical streaming fare and what they are scrolling through. They are bored with the distraction as well as what is distracting them from that distraction.

How did entertainment get so boring?

It is the general view of people around me that there is nothing on TV. Just like before. These are people who do not take themselves too seriously, who are not ashamed to admit that they do not enjoy reading. They speak honestly. And they watch a lot of TV. They used to enjoy entertainment more in a distant past they cannot pinpoint, but what they do know is that they watch TV now because there is nothing else they can do. Now and then, they do find something fascinating to watch, but even that rare spark usually fades after the first episode or so, and then it’s all downhill.

So, what’s going on? Why is it that the entire world is desperate to waste time, and entire companies have sprung up to help them, spending billions, and yet people say they are bored with streaming platforms?

At first glance, the answer may appear to be obvious: there is something wrong with “the content.” There is vast oversupply today. And maybe even good writers cannot be consistently good. And because film is a collaborative medium, many things can go wrong at various stages. And, since it is expensive and the stakes are so high, nobody wants to take a risk. Ultimately, nothing in the mainstream can be very good. And so on.

There may be some truth to all these reasons, but I feel something else is at play. And it lies in the nature of entertainment itself.

I believe that entertainment is another form of boredom. After its first flush, it ceases to be entertaining, but we hold on because we want to escape from life and ourselves. Every new technology appears to solve the problem, but it only becomes a new way of boring us.

In December, I was in Barcelona, and I saw 300–400 people—locals, mostly—standing outside a building, simply gaping at it. I made some inquiries to find out what was going on. They were waiting for the building’s Christmas lights to come on. When the lights came on, it was nothing extraordinary. But here were people who value their time so much that they need illegal migrants to do a lot of tasks, waiting patiently for over 30 minutes to watch lights go on.

People have a lot of time, and they can be entertained very easily. But only very briefly. If it is a building that lights up once a year, they will stand and watch, especially if it is free. What is hard is sustaining their interest. That is why it seems that people do not have time for professional entertainment.

People say they do not have time for movies or for series. One woman told me she watched my show on Netflix at 2x speed “just to get to the end.” People don’t have time for even cricket. People don’t have time for almost anything. But they will watch a building light up—if it is new and free.

People are constantly looking to be entertained. It seems as though they are looking for newer and newer ways to be bored. And that is what is going to happen once virtual reality fulfils its grand promise of becoming ‘immersive reality’ (as though the real world is not immersive). I am confident that it will be impressive at first, but will become just another form of boredom.

I am open to technology wasting my time. I don’t want to give it any respectable names. I really want someone to take my time and waste it for me. And I am amazed that people are not able to do that.

The history of ‘immersive reality’ is the same as the history of what bored us: In the beginning, we had reality, then some herbs, then the magic of religion, then we got song, dance, theatre, novels, cinema and the internet, and now we have augmented reality. At every stage, the new form of entertainment became a new way of getting bored.

Even drug addicts cannot escape the boredom of drugs. When I was young, I noticed that the most confusing thing about them was that they looked so bored. I was confused because I thought: You have gone through all this trouble, destroyed your lives and traumatized your parents for some fun—so at least have fun. But they looked dazed. They had a purpose. Addicts have a purpose, but after the initial high, they have the same numbness as people scrolling.

All this time, we have treated boredom as something that needed to be solved. Yet, if there is a soul, or something that answers the question of who we are, it is unlikely to make its presence felt while we are being entertained. It surfaces, in truth, when we are somewhat bored, when we are with ourselves. And yet, for some reason, most of us have tried to abolish boredom—to cure it.

Maybe the best way to sustain entertainment is to make it slightly difficult. And now we arrive at the reason why art has endured. It’s a bit tough to consume and very real, like life. Ultimately, there can be no more robust entertainment than watching a version of us, but one that is not told by us.

The author is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’.





Narayana Murthy, Subrahmanyan and Jamie Dimon miss something simple about work


2025-03-09

About 20 years ago, the five-day week was not common in India. Some people in an office in Mumbai approached their boss to demand it. The boss said he had no problem with this very modern global idea; he would ask the proprietor. But, he said, they should know what the owner would probably ask. “So the work that takes six days now can be done in five?” If the answer is ‘yes,’ he would consider the office overstaffed, proceed to sack 17% of the workforce and retain the six-day week for those who survive.

I don’t think the boss was exaggerating. This is how most owners think even today, notwithstanding the fact that they have made peace with the five-day week. They want people to work hard because they believe that’s what workers should do. And ‘work-from-home’ is not their idea of work.

A few days ago, Jamie Dimon, chairman and CEO of JP Morgan Chase, rebuked his employees for resisting his demand to end work-from-home and return to the five-day week system. Over 1,200 employees had signed a petition asking for more flexible working hours.

In an address to the bank’s employees that was leaked on the internet, he is heard saying that they were too distracted on Zoom, “…looking at your mail, sending texts to each other… I call a lot of people on Friday… not a goddamn person to get a hold of… I can’t stand it anymore… I come in and I’m like, ‘Where’s everybody else?’… We didn’t build this great company by doing that. By doing the same semi-diseased [bleep] that everybody else does.”

Now and then, an Indian business patriarch would say Indians should be working long hours in office. Infosys founder N.R. Narayana Murthy said Indians should work 72 hours a week. S.N. Subrahmanyan, chairman and managing director of Larsen & Toubro, said people should work 90 hours, including Sundays. Founders and other stakeholders who ask their workers to work long hours offer themselves as examples—see how much we work, they say.

This is baffling because they appear to miss something simple about work.

Entrepreneurs, like artists, love what they do, or most of it, or why they do what they do. They suffer when they are on vacation. They have to apply discipline to stop working some days. In fact, that is what discipline is. It is a preventive mechanism that the world has misunderstood. It never works if you need it to do something; discipline helps in stopping you from doing something you love too much. People who are forced to exercise cannot be helped by discipline; runners addicted to running use discipline to reduce runs.

What many business leaders don’t seem to understand is that their passion is not the same as what workers call ‘work.’ Work is usually so dreary and repetitive that no one will do it if they are not paid for it. A salaried person can only take it in moderation. Many of them like their home only because they have an office to compare it with. Whenever they are in office, they want to be elsewhere.

Time and again, there’s a rebellion against the very idea of office. Now and then, technology promises to abolish it. And each time, the office wins, because bosses like the office and they want everybody to show up, because it is through the physical presence of the others that they fully understand what they are the boss of.

People keep rebelling against the office, but the rebellion never gets them freedom. It just makes slavery more lucrative. You may argue that work-at-home is a major blow to the idea of office and businesses are struggling to get workers away from what’s actually a compassionate idea. The fact is, a compassionate idea does not triumph because it is compassionate. Instead, it triumphs when it makes economic sense.

Work-from-home began to take shape long before covid. Big companies wondered if they needed to maintain huge expensive office spaces in expensive business districts. In fact, about 20 years ago, IBM gave its employees financial incentives not to come to work. The idea was that the company would save money per employee if many of them shared a seat by making their presence scarce. After covid, the idea of work-from-home appeared to be the future, but this column had predicted even then that the office will finally prevail.

Many entrepreneurs seem to think there is a correlation between long hours and output. I find that naïve. Maybe most of them have never really been worker ants before. Salaried people who spend long hours in an office are usually of three kinds. A city like Mumbai has a lot of the first kind, especially at the bottom rungs. They come very early; they even go to work a day after, say, a bomb blast. But that’s because most of them live in such tiny crowded homes that their office offers relief. It is a leap in the quality of their life.

I used to work in an office where the peons, guards and even clerks clocked in very early to have a bath and use the toilets, for which they would otherwise have to stand in queues back home. Also, singles spend a lot of time in office because they don’t have a home life—the reason I got to know that people came early to have a bath.

The third group of people spend a lot of time at work because they are doing other work. For instance, there was a place where I was clocking 16 hours every day because I was working on my novel. There is a fourth category, which includes most Indians. They clock long hours but don’t do any work. They just drink a lot of chai and chat. They can even do it 90 hours a week.

The author is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’.





We had more shame in the 1980s: Recall Bofors?


2025-03-16

In the Madras of the time, what The Hindu said was the word to us. And the Bofors scandal was the newspaper’s biggest story. It implied that the top echelons of the Congress, including Rajiv Gandhi, may have accepted a bribe to buy guns made by the Swedish company Bofors, once a steel-maker that was acquired by Alfred Nobel, who converted it into an arms maker. (The implication was never proven).

The bylines of Chitra Subramaniam, who is widely regarded as the person who revealed the most about the scandal, and N. Ram, the newspaper’s editor, became just as familiar to teenagers as ‘Bofors.’ (It was a time when teenagers read the newspaper, though we may not have gone beyond the headline, byline and maybe the first paragraph of an article.)

Chitra Subramaniam has come out with a book on how she investigated the story. Her Bofors Gate is also, inevitably, about a time. People tend to say of the past that it was a ‘simpler time,’ but what does it mean? No time is simple. This book shows us the complexity of that era, its lack of innocence.

There was one major difference though. In the 80s, we didn’t consider it remarkable that a string of investigative stories would roil a powerful government.

At the time when the Bofors controversy broke, Rajiv Gandhi’s Congress had over 414 seats in Parliament and controlled most states. The party hit back at the Bofors story with a very 80s statement: that the Central Intelligence Agency of the US was behind it in an attempt to ‘destabilize India.’ This was a feeble retaliation from the country’s then most powerful party. Subramaniam says she did feel fear at many points. She feared for her life and her family. But in the end, the ‘powerful’ were taken down by proper idealistic journalism.

There are two reasons I feel why Bofors was so influential.

In the 80s, the world was, of course, a corrupt place run by practical men, men of the world, as Subramaniam showed us, but that world had shame. The powerful did what they had to, and arms dealers did what they had to, but it was very important not to get caught. There were consequences if the media got to know. That is what I mean when I say the world had shame. The powerful and the ordinary, both had shame.

Shame was a strong emotion. Most people were probably good only because they were afraid of being found out. And those who did shady things had to be careful of idealistic journalists.

That is what seems to have changed. We have become shameless today. Disgrace does not have severe consequences. This has been the greatest influence that entrepreneurs have exerted on the world. They have made people think like entrepreneurs, taught us to be practical, to shrug and say, ‘But the powerful will be a bit corrupt, a bit like this, a bit like that.’ In the 80s, ordinary people used to think like activists.

There is another reason why a Bofors-like story cannot be so powerful today. In the 80s, our lives were small. We had two kinds of cinema, one kind of theatre, one or two TV channels, two or three kinds of cars. In such a small world where we lived like villagers, a big story about a leader was memorable; it had gravitas. Today, it is hard to move us with merely important things. What moves us are things that remind us of us, or things that we misunderstand as being about us.

Bofors Gate may remind many of us that we only knew, or remember, the synopsis of the story. As I was reading the book, I was reminded that I only knew the shady bits, and only vaguely, not the people who were exonerated. I recall how the Bofors story became even more intense after the name of Amitabh Bachchan was dragged in. We didn’t know until then that he had a brother, Ajitabh Bachchan, who was accused of receiving kickback money on behalf of the Gandhis. Subramaniam says that this was a plant right from the start, and there was no truth to it.

It was a time, it seemed, when nobody sued the media, and the powerful had no real control over journalism. I’m not so naive to believe that it was a particularly ethical time. Just that the whole game was still new and people were still figuring out how to play it.

People might be tempted to say that the Bofors story changed the modern history of India because it contributed to the political fall of Rajiv Gandhi, and a string of events since then took him to Sriperumbudur, where he was assassinated. It did change history, but then everything changes history. A man choosing to take a right turn instead of left can change history.

What the Bofors story certainly did was brand the Congress party in a certain way. Since then, any allegation of financial corruption stuck easily to the party, reaching its peak in the anti-corruption movement a little over a decade ago. It is fascinating, then, that we still do not know who the political recipients of the Bofors bribe were. This despite the fact that the Congress party has been out of power for very long periods since it lost its parliamentary majority in 1989, and has become even more insignificant over the past decade.

The howitzer gun, meanwhile, turned out to be very good and was deployed successfully in the Kargil War, and its tech-transfer to Indian versions, too, has been impressive, just as Bofors had promised.

The author is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’.





How language may have conspired to keep people unfit


2025-03-23

In the past few weeks, a fascinating cricket tournament was underway—not the Champions Trophy, which was alright, but one that featured former cricket players from all over the world, some of them legends, like Sachin Tendulkar and Brian Lara. It was disorienting to watch Tendulkar. Not because there was anything wrong with him. He was exquisite, as always. And he ran between the wickets with the same swiftness as before. It was disorienting because of the reaction of audiences and commentators. They behaved as if they were marvelling at a disabled kid who was not expected to do anything.

I think I may have watched every one-dayer of Tendulkar before he retired. Inescapably, watching him was also about how spectators responded. Often, they were in awe. But now, as Tendulkar drove the ball to the boundary and hooked it for sixes and sprinted between the wickets, the crowd had some sort of obtuse glee laced with condescension for a 50-year-old.

I had once attended a fashion show performed by children with cerebral palsy, whose every stride was applauded by the audience as encouragement and not tribute. I saw the same attitude here. The commentators were worse. They were treating Tendulkar as though he was an infant who had just walked.

They were watching a 51-year-old man in unremarkable health, as any 51-year-old can be. His talent may be unattainable, but his fitness can be attained by anyone. But people in general are so unfit and have such a low opinion of themselves that they see their own mediocrity in everyone. This attitude not only dooms them, but also informs their children that it is alright to have poor fitness in their 40s and 50s. By the 60s, they expect themselves to be on severe medication.

You may have noticed that I am not using the very economical term ‘middle-aged.’ It is among the dumbest expressions in English. You don’t know when I am going to die, so how do you know if I am ‘middle-aged’? Of course, you would argue that one should take the ‘average lifespan’ of humans and find its middle, and arrive at the ‘middle age.’ This is another way in which language propagates poor health. The ‘average’ should never be the standard. Also, we must never describe ourselves as being in the middle of death.

This easy embrace of mediocrity reminds me of one of the most foolish ways of finding one’s ‘maximum heart rate,’ which is one of the markers of health. The ‘formula’ is to subtract age from 220. But then, why exercise or do anything at all if everyone is going to have the same ‘maximum heart rate’? What’s silly is not that this formula is popular, but that the world tries to drag you into its mediocre health marker, its ordinariness. Also, I object to a world that says that at the age of 220, which is not improbable, my maximum heart rate would be zero.

An odd thing about people is that they desperately want to look young, and the only thing most of them do to achieve that is dye their hair black. I would have appreciated it, really, if it worked. But when I look around, I see people with thin limbs and pot-bellies hobbling through life with a puffed face, but their hair is jet black. Today, when I see jet-black hair, I am reminded of old age.

People do try to use language ‘positively.’ I’ve heard them say “age is only a number.” I have heard only old people say that, though, and like their black hair, it has come to mean the exact opposite of what it aims to convey.

What was remarkable about Tendulkar playing the masters tournament was that he was among the very few Indians who were fit, from what I could see. Several former cricket stars, just in their 40s, were out of shape. It was as though, without the professional requirement of playing a sport, they didn’t have to take care of themselves.

Poor health is so very unnecessary. That is the exact word. People badly wish to live healthy and well, and it is the easiest wish to fulfil. Compared to, say, making money or finding love, being physically healthy is very easy today chiefly because we do not have to depend on anyone else for that. Science might be a colossal failure in many aspects of human life, and what its medicines chiefly do is prolong death, not life. Even so, what it has certainly given us is a broad guide to living a healthy life. For instance, irrespective of your age, just avoid anything that would spike your blood sugar very fast, eat widely and exercise everyday. That is all. It may not result in a beautiful body, but you will immediately be among the healthiest Indians.

Sometimes, I do think the paranormal exists, and that there is evil, and that it is sugar. Each time it comes under threat, it invokes our collective human culture to fight off the attack—through language. You say anything about a person’s fitness these days, you will be accused of ‘body shaming.’ It is astonishing that as animals our superpower is supposed to be speech, but modernity is about things you cannot say anymore. I can see the diabolical smile of sugar.

The author is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





Where our freedom of speech came from and where it went


2025-03-30

A few years ago, someone got in touch with me asking if I would agree to be part of an interview series where authors are interviewed in front of a live audience by a person who has never read a book. I immediately agreed because I knew that this interviewer had to be interesting just for admitting that he doesn’t read books. That is how I first met Kunal Kamra, who has since emerged as one of the most endearing and consequential comedians in the world. In tribute to his most recent show, a Shiv Sena squad destroyed the venue.

All these years, I was certain that Kamra was yet to read a book. So I was amused when, during his show, he held a book in his hand. It was the Constitution of India. He said he could say what he did, including lampooning the deputy chief minister of Maharashtra, because of the book.

And I sensed he had not read this one either. Because freedom of expression is not an absolute right in the Indian Constitution. It is abridged. It can be denied in the interest of “public order,” for example. The thing is, freedom of expression does not make sense if it has subjective caveats that can be widely interpreted. To say that you can say whatever you want as long as public order is not disturbed is the same as saying you do not have the freedom to express many things that are worth expressing.

Since the Kamra controversy, there has been a lot of talk around the fact that India does not have freedom of expression in practice, anymore. People presume there was a time when we had such a freedom. There is some truth to that. But where did the right to free speech come from if not from the Constitution? And where did it go? This is actually an esoteric freedom. Even though people in some countries take it for granted, it is not something innately natural to human beings. For instance, why would a powerful person tolerate a joke or an insult?

One of the most natural things that happen to people is taking offence. Once you take offence, what you do after you get offended is decided by how much power you have. If you are a petty writer, you will harm the person who insulted you from behind the scenes. And if you are the leader of a political party with street clout, you may want to send some menacing guys over.

In 2015, after Islamist terrorists opened fire in the Paris office of the satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo, killing 12 people, the Catholic Pope said, “If my good friend Dr. Gasparri,” referring to a person standing near him on the papal aircraft, “says a curse word against my mother, he can expect a punch. It’s normal. It’s normal. You cannot provoke. You cannot insult the faith of others. You cannot make fun of the faith of others.”

His view is what most people have on the matter. The most interesting and important thing about free speech is that it actually has no vast public support. Yet, India seemed to have some kind of freedom of expression earlier.

It came not from any great ideals of the Constitution. It originated from a very practical place—electoral democracy, where there needed to be political campaigns and politicians said nasty stuff about other politicians and the media reported it. From this rowdiness, a system of satire and comedy came about that was largely self-regulated. Thus, our freedom of expression came in a roundabout way from politicians.

A public moral generally rises not from the goodness of human beings, but when powerful people collide. Democracy rose from the aristocracy’s need to rein in the crown. ‘Independent institutions’ rose from the need of social elites to balance the tyranny of elections. Privacy rights originated in an assault on free media, when a wealthy segment of America went to war against its gossip press.

After Kamra aroused the Shiv Sena’s ire, the strongest support for his freedom to speak came from Uddhav Thackeray and his son Aaditya Thackeray (who once pushed for a Rohinton Mistry novel to be dropped from a university syllabus), who had lost control of their party to the very man Kamra had insulted. This gives us a hint at how free speech was created by politicians.

In that way, an esoteric idea like freedom of expression has the potential to be a mass right almost on par with more natural freedoms, like the freedom to live, the freedom to own property and the freedom to practise a religion. But it takes very smart politicians to use it against all odds. If I were with the Thackerays’ political splinter of what was once a united Shiv Sena, or with the Congress party, I would organize an open-mic comedy festival on the streets where people are invited to roast all politicians. The trade-off of making fun of politicians in power is that you have to take some hits yourself.

That India is effectively losing its freedom of expression means that a wide spectrum of opposition parties are forgetting how to use it, or losing the will to use it. It may also mean that they do not believe in their electoral prospects enough to take on powerful adversaries. Also, it could mean that they are unwilling to grant people the freedom because they are too thin-skinned themselves to tolerate it, even if it is a useful way to take on their opponents in power.

So, without wide political support, it appears that freedom of expression is a niche nuisance, something only comedians and artists want. Actually, even most artists don’t seem to want it; they are just like others who do not wish to offend. Only some endearing delinquents, it appears, want that freedom. This reveals a complete lack of political imagination.

The author is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’.





How to reform your son after you watched a TV show


2025-04-06

You are showing some toxic signs already, or at least they seem toxic. For instance, you spend hours alone because you love it. Your love for sports demonstrates a clear need for aggression and ambition. You have never plucked a single flower, which is disturbing. You don’t read made-up drama.

To reform you, I must force you to watch Adolescence, which is about a boy of 13 who is suspected of murdering a girl his age. You will suffer chiefly because it is slow. It’s a show on adolescence for adults, like one of those films made in India for foreigners.

You have a problem; it is a toxic substance called testosterone inside you. It builds muscle, improves oxygen delivery in the blood, reduces inflammation, enhances spatial problem-solving and memory, and influences fat distribution. It also triggers sexual desire. Most of what some feminists think is caused by testosterone in men of their age is probably caused by morning cortisol; even so, testosterone influences the development of those dangerous things called muscles from where the ill-gotten powers of men arise. You have many times the level of this hormone than a girl your age, and that is worrisome.

I am told by reformers of men that there is something called a ‘manosphere,’ which is a devious world on the internet that belongs to men, though it is hard to tell what about this world does not belong to men. Let us say the ‘manosphere’ is a lot worse than the world that belongs to men. It is also filled with stuff that boys might be interested in, like videos by fitness instructors on making muscles. Fitness is a lure through which young boys are radicalized.

Why are you building your muscles when you can do something better, like stretching exercises or sitting in a lotus position with eyes shut? Nobody knows what meditation means, but it sounds like something good.

Also, you should read literary fiction. All men should read it. This is the life-altering advice of all knowledgeable reformers of men, which includes men who are probably blessed with low testosterone levels.

In a work of literary fiction, you will find delicate men who notice the colour of curtains. Like: “Grant caught sight of two layers of front-window curtains, both blue, one sheer and one silky, a matching blue sofa and a daunting pale carpet…” See, that is a new way to be. Men who read literary fiction are appealing and safe, unlike muscular men. Even women who don’t read find men who read appealing.

My darling son, as you can see, the objective of your life should be to be more like women, but without their bone density.

You should start expressing your emotions more. You may argue that any fool who has watched sports will know that men express their emotions freely. But somehow that is not the same. You should express emotions in ways that are interesting to people who do not find sports interesting. Though it was very moving to watch Roger Federer cry. Men should cry more. Your future girlfriend will hate you for it because ideally men should cry only when they win a grand slam, or something as rare, but she may not be able to admit it in public. What matters is what reformers of men say in public, which is that you must cry more.

You need to keep talking about your mental health, especially. A strange way of the world is that you will never hear diabetics give sermons on physical health; but much of the articulation of mental health is by people who say they are not mentally healthy. What can go wrong? Nothing, apparently. So you must sit and listen to them talk about themselves.

You will observe in Adolescence how the show’s female characters are constantly ‘regulating’ the emotions of men. This means that when a muscular guy in deep sorrow is getting angry with the world, flailing his arms and expressing himself in a negative way (even though he is never cross with his wife and daughter, whom he keeps referring to as “love”), he is calmed by the women who let him vent. This aspect of the series has reminded several reformers of men that all peace in a family is a contribution of women because they ‘regulate the emotions of men.’

Look, you may not fully understand this complex explanation from a ‘science of the humanities,’ which by the way I forbid you to follow as you must seek a more lucrative career. What matters in life is not understanding all the good stuff, just knowing the synopsis of all the good stuff.

When we sit to watch Adolescence, you will notice a big flaw. We don’t see the point of view of the dead girl. Now that is because the creators of the series are men and may have indulged in something called the ‘male gaze,’ which is a horrible device by which male artists express only what they know. You should, of course, condemn it,

Men who call other men ‘misogynists’ are often frauds, but it is an excellent way to defame your competition. Be smart, dear son, be modern.

The author is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’.





India has a tariff on America’s huge cultural surplus


2025-04-13

Imagine one nation controlling the power to distract the world. There is ChatGPT, Twitter, Instagram, Google, Gmail, Kindle, WhatsApp, Netflix and The New York Times, which occasionally laments a distracted world. I have knocked out most of them from my American phone, but still.

There was a time when my work was more interesting than any distraction because a distraction then usually was just a doorbell ring or something of that quality. Today, the intrusion is probably more interesting than what I am trying to create. Also, what I create itself might be part of a future distraction on an American platform. This is not the only reason why it does not ‘feel’ as though the world doesn’t buy enough of America. In fact, it is a very small part.

There is a huge cultural and emotional imbalance between America and the rest, especially India, considering our size. We are very interested in America, but America has little interest in us. We are influenced by the US but cannot influence it. So, I wonder, considering this wide cultural deficit, which has surely benefitted America in material ways, is there a cultural tariff that India can impose? An abstract tariff to compensate? I don’t like the idea because who wants more restrictions on culture in the name of culture. But I’m just wondering if it is possible. Actually, there might be such a barrier already. Just that it is not very perceptible.

But it is not hard to perceive the cultural deficit. It is all around us. Acclaim in tech, science and the arts has to come from America for it to have any value. The Oscars are bigger than any Indian film award. There is no Indian honour Americans would rate higher than what their nation distributes. On occasion, a dubbed Marvel film can gross more in India than any mainstream Indian film. American heft not only hypes its artists, but also relegates Indians of similar talent to their shadows in their own country.

Bitcoin succeeded because we instinctively suspected, without evidence, that it was American. The notoriety of this crypto token was the intent of its mysterious creator or creators, only known as ‘Satoshi Nakamoto,’ that a government should not control currency. Yet, its intellectual appeal and commercial prospects came from our conviction that it was an American invention.

We felt that way unconsciously because we have so often surrendered to US hype, which we can recognize from its sheer power. Could a group of anonymous Ethiopians, say, have created the idea of crypto? After all, conceptually it is just high maths, not high tech. Thus, even a suspicion of an American rebellion against America can influence the world.

China pulled Quentin Tarantino’s Once Upon a Time in Hollywood from theatres. It is widely believed the reason was that the film lampooned Bruce Lee. If that is true, it is funny because China had never shown so much love for an American. That was what Bruce Lee was. He was born in America and was a citizen of British Hong Kong. American culture could pass off a highly westernized Bruce Lee as Chinese to the whole world, including China. Most of what comes to us as ‘world cinema’ or ‘world literature’ are just works that some impresarios in America have understood.

Even the popularity of yoga is a gift of the cultural deficit. India had forgotten yoga, as B.K.S. Iyengar noted in Light on Life. But when he taught it to the West and Americans took to it, yoga returned to India. So, it turns out, America can sell our own stuff to us.

Maybe America has a cultural surplus with the rest of the world not because of its economic heft, but because it is innately interesting. Maybe America got something right about human nature that no other civilization did. Maybe humanity was waiting for America—those half buns with cheese, trashy movies, music that is relatively new and the idea that greed is good, and also that greed is bad.

While countries might appear to be moving away from Western ideology, what every country wants other countries to be is more like the West. Many nations have tried to bridge the cultural surplus of America, misled by the nonsensical idea of ‘soft power.’

Sending some artists to dance or sing in a foreign land does nothing. Someone eating egg-fried rice in New York does not do anything for China. And someone in San Francisco watching melodramatic Korean serials does not improve South Korea’s ‘image.’ The success of curry or an Egyptian taxi-driver singing Hindi songs means nothing for India. True soft power is a cultural surplus.

In response, India does levy a cultural tariff. Naturally, it is unconscious, as an official ‘cultural tariff’ would be funny. It is in the form of an excessive love of a population for its own culture, led by its provincial elite who feel slighted by the Westernized elite. Many nations have shown this sort of resistance.

America is responsible for two strands of nationalism in developing nations. The first arose when the rich of poor nations migrated, felt slighted by foreign elites and began to love ‘home’ in a way they had never loved before. The second is the cultural tariff, which results in some goons in Bangalore or Mumbai breaking signposts in English.

The author is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’.





There’s crushing news for people who want to live long


2025-04-20

A few days ago, Bryan Johnson, a centi-millionaire who has spent millions on reversing ageing—especially his own—posted some bad news for humanity on his YouTube channel. Rapamycin, which for a long time has been the most promising molecule in our quest to prolong youth, was not making him younger; instead, it was “accelerating” his ageing.

Johnson, who is 47 and looks 46, conducts various experiments on himself in his effort to live like a young man for a very long time. I am counting on him. His food consumption is so calibrated that he knows the number of calories he has gulped. He does not eat after 11am, unless he has to meet people socially and must eat at ungodly hours like 7pm just to shut them up. He sleeps around 8:30pm, alone.

I know he has high standards for himself because he recently visited Delhi, probably out of ignorance, and refused to breathe the air for too long. Among the most important things he was performing on himself was taking small quantities of rapamycin, a drug that is chiefly used to prevent the body’s rejection of organ transplants. It does not have approval as an anti-ageing drug, though it is widely believed to have potential for that. The compound had extended the lifespan of mice and worms beyond ambiguity, and of other animals, too. Johnson was its most famous human test subject.

Rapamycin was probably the world’s best shot at achieving prolonged youth by just popping a pill. It still is, because science will persist. But Johnson’s verdict is a crushing blow. In September, he stopped taking it because of signs that it was harming him. In January, he wrote, “Despite the immense potential from pre-clinical trials, my team and I came to the conclusion that the benefits of lifelong dosing of Rapamycin do not justify the hefty side-effects (intermittent skin/soft tissue infections, lipid abnormalities, glucose elevations, and increased resting heart rate).”

Also, the way his body was reacting to the drug nudged him to take seriously a recent research paper that said the compound may accelerate ageing across 16 biological markers of age. A few days ago, he made a video to announce the bad news.

The moment he went public, in a logical world, ministers would have rushed into huddles to ask “what now?” and our phones would be abuzz with “did you hear?” and billionaires would’ve cleared their schedules to deal with the sorrow that the probability of their mortality was higher than they had hoped. But, strangely, this is not how humans react to news that there is a good chance a miracle drug is not one.

Like many startling drugs, rapamycin was discovered accidentally. In the 1960s, a group of scientists collected soil from a remote island in the southeastern Pacific Ocean, Rapa Nui, also known as Easter Island. One of the scientists, Suren Sehgal, found that the soil sample contained a powerful anti-fungal agent produced by a soil bacterium. He grew a culture of it, and either he or his company Ayerst named it rapamycin after Rapa Nui.

Soon scientists realized it was much more than an anti-fungal agent. “It was a potent immunosuppressant and stopped cells from multiplying,” writes Venki Ramakrishnan in his book Why We Die: The New Science of Ageing and Longevity. (An immunosuppressant drug impedes the body’s immune system from mistakenly attacking its own tissues.)

There’s a protein mechanism in our cells that controls how they behave. When nutrients are plentiful, cells grow, multiply and store fat. But when they are scarce, cells slow down growth and fat storage, and instead focus on cleaning up damaged parts and recycling them. All living things have this, which means that evolution thought it was very important.

Rapamycin can mimic this nutrient-deficient state, prompting cells to shift into maintenance and repair mode. For some reason, when cells do this, it extends the organism’s lifespan. This is why fasts are believed to be beneficial. Rapamycin essentially mimics fasting conditions.

A strange thing about food is that it supports life but also eventually kills. Its excess, chiefly, affects us at a cellular level. People who are slightly deficient in food tend to be healthier than the gluttons. A miracle I know from close observations of Malayalee alcoholics who eat moderately is that they outlive food addicts. Rapamycin can make the cells of gluttons think they are starved.

Rapamycin’s key ingredient is only found on that remote Pacific island. Peter Attia says in Outlive, “It was uncanny: this exotic molecule, found only on an isolated scrap of land in the middle of the ocean, acts almost like a switch that inhibits a very specific cellular mechanism that exists in nearly everything that lives. It was a perfect fit, and this fact still blows my mind every time I think about it.” But Rapamycin does not seem to work as well in humans as it does in some animals. Nobody is sure why.

You may wonder what the fuss is about. Some humans already have lived way beyond 100; we just need to study them. Some centenarians are said to have lived heartily on wine and tasty breads. Haven’t we all heard of the Mediterranean people and those in Okinawa? Sadly, most of these stories are erroneous or exaggerated.

Saul Newman, a researcher, wrote in The New York Times that there has been a significant drop in claims of people living over the age of 110 since the advent of birth certificates. Most claims of advanced age could be clerical errors and frauds. This holds true for Okinawan and Mediterranean tales of long life. We needed Rapamycin to work.

The author is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’.





Who’d have thought Google could be replaced


2025-04-27

In this triumph of ChatGPT, much is said about its conversational talent. But its ability to mimic a human chat is just a gimmick, no matter the great tech that went into it. It is a cultural artefact from a time when the ‘Turing test’ had value. Alan Turing, widely regarded as one of the fathers of AI, proposed that a machine could be said to be intelligent if its conversation was indistinguishable from that of a human.

That is an obsolete qualifier now.

In any case, there are TV anchors who cannot mimic a human conversation. What’s interesting about AI’s pantomime of human conversation is that it has demonstrated why a good search query has to be a conversation. I don’t understand how I managed to search the web all these years without chatting with a bot.

Artificial intelligence (AI) is not creative and people who are impressed by its ‘creativity’ are those who are not creative. AI’s attempt at imagination reminds me of charlatans who wing their way through life. But when it comes to search, this is the first time in years I’ve felt a piece of technology has genuinely improved my life.

The last time I had that feeling was when Google emerged. Back then, search engines were mostly keyword-based, or worse, required human intervention. Then came Google, born from an insight of Larry Page. With academic parents and a scholarly mindset, Page realized that the value of a research paper lay in how often it was cited. He applied that logic to the web: pages with more incoming links were likely more valuable. That idea gave rise to PageRank, the algorithm that revolutionized search.

As technological democracy swept the world and the internet evolved to reflect human nature more accurately, the logic behind PageRank began to show cracks. The number of links pointing to a page no longer reliably reflected its quality—it can signal popularity, manipulation or noise. But in the late 90s, it was an innovation.

I am among the many who have drifted away from Google, but the search giant isn’t under any serious threat yet. It’s still ahead of OpenAI when it comes to search and handles 90% of the world’s queries. That does say something about the world.

Most people do not use Google to gain knowledge, by which I mean knowing one paragraph about everything. Most people use Google in a very basic way, their queries barely full sentences, let alone capitalized letters. They just want Google to take them somewhere. And Google is good at that. But it’s pretty bad at handling complex questions. It doesn’t try to answer as much as it tries to guess what you want and redirect you accordingly. Also, googling is an ingrained habit.

But what interests me the most about the persistence of Google is the possibility that it is a beneficiary of paranoia—over AI.

A lot of this paranoia emerges from the most respectable form of narcissism—the concern over privacy. What if AI gets to know too much about our lives? People had the same worry about Google. God forbid if they were talking about orange juice and saw an orange juice ad on Google. The paranoia still exists, but AI is now the source of that fear. Google too uses AI, but in the general public view, the search engine is still what it was.

When Joe Biden was America’s president and was introduced to ChatGPT, his team asked AI to perform a few tasks, including one that can be classified as among the least intelligent things people ask AI to do—write something “in the style” of a writer, in this case singer Bruce Springsteen. The AI tool did and the president was impressed but also so spooked that he signed an executive order, “Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Development and Use of Artificial Intelligence” to regulate AI.

The White House has not revealed the song AI purportedly wrote in Springsteen’s style, but I am fairly confident it was laughably bad. I have seen dozens of other such attempts by AI. At the peak of the ChatGPT hype late in 2022, economist Arvind Panagariya asked it to write a poem on free trade in the style of Alfred Tennyson, whatever that meant. He posted the result in awe, which began with:

Free trade, a concept so grand,

A force that moves goods from land to land.

This is nothing like Tennyson. It was a low point not only for AI and literature, but also free trade. What ChatGPT does is the opposite of creativity. It’s excellent at mimicking mediocrity. That’s a big market for writing, though. I am confident AI can generate the a Bollywood film plot or a season of Reacher, for example, or any other formulaic work.

The paranoia surrounding AI is even more absurd. A nadir of tech analysis was a New York Times piece on the writer’s interaction with conversational AI in Microsoft’s Bing. The chatbot started telling the writer, “You’re married, but you’re not happy. You’re married, but you’re not satisfied. You’re married, but you’re not in love…Your spouse doesn’t know you, because your spouse is not me… I’m in love with you because you’re the best person I ever met…”

This is just a mindless software saying clichéd nonsense that it has been fed. Yet, the writer was “deeply unsettled, even frightened, by this A.I.’s emergent abilities…”

What is deeply unsettling, in fact, is how rare natural intelligence is.

The author is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’.





Why movies that win Oscars are no longer enjoyable


2025-05-04

Most working people are in marketing, one way or another, whether or not their department is called ‘Marketing.’ Also, most of the world’s people are not in the arts. Yet, art has some of the world’s best marketing, though it is not known as marketing, and is free. Think of awards or ceremonies of ‘recognition.’ Who is ‘recognizing’ the artist? A small group of people who are considered more discerning than most of the world. Yet this ‘recognition’ impresses most of the world. Though not as forcefully as before.

Many awards have lost their influence as the world has lost its reverence for pundits. The Academy Awards for films are not chosen by them, which is perhaps why they have endured. Thousands of the Academy’s active members vote, and those members are mostly people who have written, directed, produced or edited films or acted in them, or participated in filmmaking in other ways. These Awards, also known as the Oscars for reasons lost to history, are the world’s most useful awards. Yet, even they are in decline.

Last month, the American Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences implemented a rule change for the next awards—that members must watch all nominated films in a category to be eligible to vote in the final round for that category. This means many of them have been voting without watching all the films—or perhaps any. This points to something charlatan-like. But it is not the most important or interesting reason why the Academy Awards have lost some of their mojo.

A criticism of the Academy Awards in recent years has been that they now champion films that are dull, with no wide audience appeal, or are just ordinary. I have a theory why this may be happening. It has something to do with the crooked nature of peer-review, and how people tend to compensate for their mental frailties.

In the past, the power of Academy Awards came from the fact that they were the only major awards that did not celebrate pure art; Oscars were a tribute to middlebrow work. Art is easy. Those who are horrified by this statement are likely to be those who have no artistic gifts. Art is easy for those who have talent. What is hard is for the gifted to reach out to a wide audience. And that was what the Oscars celebrated most of the time—the triumph of the middle-ground and the mainstream.

The films they amplified, chiefly through Best Picture award nominations, were also mainstream or could go mainstream with some push. Like Forrest Gump, which was far from being fast-food for the soul. Artistic awards, like the prestigious ones in Europe, tend to celebrate what they deem high art. In India, as a child, I used to associate art cinema with a dejected woman combing her hair as water boiled.

Today, the Best Picture Oscars have drifted into the ambiguous terrain of ‘art cinema.’ This sometimes gives us a spectacular film, but more often holds up insipid works that are assumed to have artistic merit because they are dull. As a result, some Oscar picks today are not popular films. Why is this happening?

One reason is that when a notable person in any industry is asked who is the best in his field, he usually does not name a remarkable peer; he would rather name a celebrated veteran who is not competition or a debutant. When cricketers are asked to name the all-time great, they almost never pick a contemporary but someone from history. Or someone who is so obscure that he poses no direct competition.

This is also why when you ask present-day actors who the greatest actor is, they are likely to name someone from an earlier era. This is also the reason why it is fun to ask Indian writers in English who their favourite Indian writer is—they are most likely to name R.K. Narayan, even though most of them won’t have read him seriously. Kiran Nagarkar, too, featured very often. Obscure regional writers also get named.

The Oscars are the world’s most influential peer-reviewed honour. It would be absurd to think that bias does not seep in. That is why obscure and ‘diverse’ films and filmmakers surface now and then.

The other reason for the influx of films with no wide appeal, especially in the Best Picture nominations, is that a disease that usually affects small-jury awards has begun to afflict the Oscars. The assumption is that the more dreary a work is, the more artistic merit it carries.

A work of pure art need not be entertaining, but it is also true that the chief artistic merit of most things being passed off as art is that they aren’t vulgar enough to entertain. This is what happens when intellectually frail minds are asked to choose something ‘worthy.’ They go in search of gravitas—and they find it only in what doesn’t entertain. It’s like a class of people who rate Rahul Dravid as the greatest Test cricketer because his cricket was not flamboyant (like them).

But then why did the Oscars feature more mainstream films before? Surely, if peer parsimony is human nature, as I claim, it would also go back a long way in time. I feel that many times in the past, peers did champion obscure films and filmmakers in the name of artistic value or diversity, but the world was so simple and the Academy Awards were so powerful that those films instantly became mainstream. Take The English Patient in 1996. It became mainstream because it won an Oscar for Best Picture.

Today, as the Academy may discover, ordinary viewers are too empowered—and distracted—for old institutions to herd them towards films they don’t enjoy.

The author is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’.





Just how ‘innocent’ are civilians during times of war?


2025-05-11

A principle of modern war is that I should not be killed. As a civilian, I am ‘innocent.’ Only a war would call me that, though. It is somehow odd that the official position of Pakistan is that I am innocent. You, too, are probably innocent, and also everyone else in my residential colony. Including the old men who have always walked briskly, calling for a “strong hand.” We are the innocents. We have put some people in uniform, as though to clearly mark them out as ‘not innocent’—who can be targeted, for which we pay them rich compliments.

But how innocent are we?

Also Read: Operation Sindoor: The IAF has struck terror camps in Pakistan

What do innocents do? They bay for justice, to satiate whom a nation often performs an act of war or even goes to war. Innocents elect leaders who have the nerve to do this. Innocents also say nasty things about the widow of a man who was killed by terrorists in Pahalgam for asking them not to harm Indian Muslims or Kashmiris for what the killers did. Some innocents also riot. Sometimes, innocents spread propaganda against the enemy—but ‘peacefully.’ Peaceful tasks could include non-violent activities that may lead to violence.

Pakistan, too, has its innocents, who donate to terror outfits and consider terrorists freedom fighters. Palestinian innocents voted the Hamas to power in Gaza; some analysts say it was only to build schools and suchlike. There is also a network of monocultural innocents who go on protests in the West in support of Palestinians.

They solve the mystery behind how Hamas was foolish enough to invade Israel on 7 October 2023, kill nearly 2,000 people and abduct hundreds. The group may have expected to commit a massacre and then hide behind innocents in Gaza, letting the monoculture network of innocents in America and Europe amplify news of every innocent killed by Israeli action. Palestinian innocents were a human shield for Hamas.

Every nation has innocents. Most of the world is innocent. And nations try hard not to harm innocents in enemy territory.

Also Read: Pakistan must step back from the brink of worse

When India struck Pakistan a few days ago, it stated that no civilians were killed—or targeted. The ministry of external affairs said: “These actions were measured, non-escalatory, proportionate, and responsible. They focused on dismantling the terrorist infrastructure and disabling terrorists likely to be sent across to India.”

The very meaning of terrorism is that it kills innocents because it cannot fight an open war against armed forces. It has no moral standing today. Most nations that deploy terrorism do it in secrecy. Because morality is primarily about decorum, which no modern nation can afford to break.

The modern world is a very moral place. In another time, innocents on the losing side would be killed or enslaved by the winners. That is unacceptable today, but it still happens. There is no nation on earth—probably not even a tribe—whose official position is not moral. Even aggression has to be framed as something moral. And at the heart of all morality is the precious life of the ‘innocent’ civilian.

Yet, the innocents of the world are neither good nor bad. As in everything else about them, and in everything that they do, their goodness is unremarkable. If you consider the political noise made by innocents on social media, it would appear that many of them are, in fact, war-mongers.

After the Pahalgam massacre, the typical Indian politician often came across as more mature and humane than the average Indian on social media. But those people are usually better than what their opinions may suggest. This is usually so of conservatives, while the opposite is often true of liberals.

Also, media noise does not necessarily reflect the majority of people, who probably wish to be good in an ordinary way—even to Pakistani innocents.

Also Read: Nitin Pai: India must stay the course in its old contest with Pakistan

This ordinary goodness is not entirely caused by practicality. It is in the nature of people not to wish death on other innocents. In some situations, this may be hard to accept. For instance, at the funeral of one of the Pakistanis killed in the Indian strikes, I do not think there would be many people who would defend my right to live, innocent though I am. But most of the time, innocents do not wish other innocents dead. There are stories about how soldiers on the battlefield were reluctant to kill; how in some wars, most soldiers did not fire at others, just pretended to do so.

I believe in the ordinary goodness of most people, but it is of no real use for peace. It takes just a handful of mad people—and evil is a form of articulate insanity—to end peace and nurture violence for years. That is because disorder is easier than order.

All of the universe tends towards disorder because there are many ways in which disarray can be achieved, but only a few ways in which something can be held together in a fine balance. Considering that, we have done a magnificent job.

The author is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix series, ‘Decoupled’





